Components of a Unix System:
In this module we're going to take a closer look at the components of a UNIX system.Let's start with a bit of background into how UNIX is written. C was developed to make UNIX independent of hardware architecture. When the UNIX kernel and shell were written in C, it made programming and debugging easier. C was developed by programmers for programmers. C compilers were made available for different UNIX versions. In the late 1970s, the popularity of C grew, and C compilers became available for a large number of processors and operating systems. C has a rich set of functions that deal with all aspects of data manipulation, I/O, math, and character functions. The ability of C to use more traditional high level constructs gives the programmer elegance and flexibility while maintaining the options for raw power. C++ is an object-oriented version of C that has become popular with object-oriented design and programming. A UNIX system is usually represented as a set of circles with functions in layers. The first layer is the hardware which interfaces directly with the kernel. The kernel is the base operating system which provides services for the other layers. Built on the kernel is the command interface, often called shell, and the commands and utilities. There are a number of different shells available for UNIX systems. The last layer is the application programs which are built on the application programming interfaces, the shell, and the commands and utilities. The UNIX kernel is the base operating system. Most of the UNIX kernel is written in C which makes it easy to port to other processors. These are the routines that are dependent on the machine architecture for functions like memory mapping and interrupt handling. The kernel provides basic functions like process scheduling, memory management, device control, and file management. There's also a system call interface and operator interface. UNIX is implemented in the layered approach that is shown here. At the base there is the specific manufacturer's hardware. A unique hardware interface is provided to achieve complete hardware independence. It is partly written in assembler and partly in C language. This is the only vendor-specific part of the UNIX implementation. Upper levels of UNIX are written in C. The command interface in a UNIX system is called the shell. Why "shell"? Because it is the outermost layer of the UNIX system. It serves as a command language interpreter and programming language, and allows foreground and background processing. When you log on to a UNIX system, you start to communicate with the shell. The shell can be compared to TSO in a z/OS system. Essentially the shell is a program which allows users to communicate with the operating system. The shell reads commands that are entered and interprets them as requests to execute other programs, access files, or provide output. The shell does not have a user friendly interface. It is driven by commands which can seem cryptic, but programmers and system programmers like it because of its power. Today, vendors provide solutions for UNIX users to replace the shell interface with a window interface or a menu-driven interface, which is easier to use for users who are not familiar with UNIX command syntax. There are two native command interface shells. The Bourne shell is the most basic shell and is the default z/OS UNIX shell. The C shell has the functionality of the C language and is preferred by many programmers. Access the command line of any UNIX-like operating system and there’s a good chance you’ll also find a Bash shell. Bash has become the default shell on both Linux and macOS, making the ability to work with it an essential skill for any software developer. Bash, which stands for “Born Again Shell,” was designed as a replacement for the Bourne shell and is available on Z through Rocket Software. In the next video we'll look at some fundamental functions of UNIX, starting with commands.

Fundemental Functions:
The UNIX commands and utilities are distributed with the UNIX system and there are over 100 to choose from.A command is a UNIX program that is executed in the shell. Commands are sometimes referred to as tools. For some commands, the shell calls other programs called utilities. For the user, there is no difference between a command and a utility. The table shows examples of some UNIX commands. Some of them are similar to DOS commands. Note that the commands are very short and usually in lowercase. Remember, command names are also case sensitive. They must be spelled correctly in the correct case. UNIX commands are usually very small programs designed to do one simple task. Commands can be combined together in a shell script which then becomes a new, more powerful command. We'll explain some of these commands in more detail later. The meaning of some of them is self-explanatory. Date shows... well the date! And some are a little more cryptic. awk presents the initials of the people who created them (Aho, Weinberger, and Kernihgan in case you were wondering). The UNIX file system is a hierarchical file system. There is no concept of record structures. The applications are responsible for defining the structure of the data that is read or written. A UNIX system can treat a file as a text file or a binary file. A text file consists of characters which use newline as a separator between lines. A binary file consists of sequences of binary words. File name extensions are used to identify some common file types used by utility programs. There are four file types in a UNIX system: Ordinary disk files, Directories, Special files, and First-in-first-out files. In a UNIX system, every device is associated with a special file in the /dev directory.The UNIX kernel uses device drivers to manage the devices. There is a device driver for each type of device, for example, DASD, tape, terminal, console, and printers. Also, main memory can be accessed through a special file called a pseudo device. Since a device is associated with a file in the file system, users access a device in the same way as they access an ordinary file. In UNIX, devices are divided into two categories, block devices and character devices. Block devices are designed to transfer data at high speed, for example, DASD and tape. Character devices, also called raw I/O devices, transfer data in small variable length blocks. Examples of character devices are terminals, printers, and plotters. By the way TTY stands for teletypewriter, a electro-mechanical typewriter from back in the day. In a UNIX system, I/O to a data file and to a device (for example, a terminal) is treated in the same way by using the same system calls. This provides simplicity and flexibility for the UNIX user. The basic I/O system calls (open, close, read, and write) do not use I/O buffering and can therefore be inefficient in many situations. There is a portable C library which was designed to provide portability of programs by using a common I/O system. Standard I/O, usually abbreviated to stdio, is the name of a library based on the portable C library. Stdio provides a higher level I/O interface where the system calls use I/O buffering. The buffering is transparent to the user. Examples of stdio functions are fopen to open a file and fprintf to write to a file. A big difference between a UNIX system and a z/OS system is that in UNIX all files are allocated to the kernel. The process that uses the open call to allocate a file gets file descriptors from the kernel which are used to access the file. In the next video we'll continue our look at UNIX functions starting with processes.

More fundamental functions:
Processes are used in UNIX to allocate resources to users and programs. They are equivalent to address spaces in z/OS. A process is created by a fork() system call, and it is terminated by executing an exit() system call or by a kill() signal from another process. Each process has a unique identifier called a process ID (PID). The fork() system call creates a new process with identical characteristics as the process that issued the fork(). The new process is called the child process, and the process that created it is called the parent process. After the fork() system call, the two processes are running exactly the same program; however, the return code from the fork() system call is different for the parent and child. The two processes will also have different process IDs. The child inherits the file descriptors of the parent process which means it has access to the same files, including pipes, as its parent. The exec() system call is used to start a new program in a process. The sequence of fork() followed by exec() system calls is used very often in UNIX to create a new process and start a new program. UNIX pipes is way of communicating between processes. Conceptually, pipes are like a sequential file. One process can write to the pipe while another process reads from the pipe. There are two types of pipes, unnamed pipes and FIFO (named) pipes. Unnamed pipes (also referred to simply as pipes) are defined by a pseudo device type, and the pipes are buffered in memory by the pipe device driver Unnamed pipes have the restriction that they can only be used by processes which have the same parent process. The pipe system call is used to invoke an unnamed pipe. Processes use read and write system calls to access the data in a pipe. FIFO (named) pipes have names and reside in the UNIX file system. Because of this, they can be used for communication between any two processes. A FIFO pipe must be opened by the open system call. Only one process can access a FIFO pipe for reading or writing at a time. UNIX provides another communication method between processes called signaling. Signals are used for communication between processes to inform about events and trigger actions. Most signals are generated by the kernel. The kill() system call is used to send a signal to another process. The process sending a signal must know the process ID of the receiving process. The kill system call is so named because it is mostly used to terminate a process. The signal() system call is used for setting a trap to catch signals. The process ID specified in the call determines who it applies to and only those processes which satisfy the criteria accept the signal. So that covers some of the  main UNIX functions which are useful to know in order to understand z/OS UNIX. But what about security? Security in a UNIX system is based on file access security, data encryption, and user logon security. UNIX files and directories are protected by permission bits. Access is granted on three levels, owner, group, and world or other.  World is all users in the system. Owner and group are defined when a file is created and can be changed by commands later. Users with common access permissions can be gathered in a group. File permission is defined for read, write, and execute access. The system checks a user's ID for permission to access a file or directory. Access control lists (ACLs) extend the security provided by permission bits by allowing you to control access to files and directories by individual user (UID) and group (GID). UNIX has two categories of users, user and superuser. Users must use a password to log in to a UNIX system. The superuser bypasses all security checking and has access to all files. Only the superuser can perform authorized functions or commands, such as mounting a file system. From here on in we'll move into some more z/OS specifics, starting in the next video with the hierarchical file system implementation in z/OS UNIX


