Introduction to UNIX standards:
Let's get cracking.
z/OS UNIX brings together the open world and the z/OS world. Both worlds can co-exist independently while sharing the same processing and storage resources. And it's a case of getting the best of both worlds; a standard interface and portability from the open part of z/OS UNIX and a large array of services from the MVS part of z/OS. z/OS UNIX supports an environment of large operating systems or servers, distributed systems, and workstations that share common interfaces. z/OS UNIX supports the set of standards being developed by The Open Group. This includes the Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX). Users can concentrate their work in the environment where they are most comfortable, be that UNIX or MVS. For example, application developers can develop most of their applications at their workstations and then use standard POSIX interfaces to compile, test, and debug their programs on the z/OS system. Current z/OS applications run as usual. Current users continue to have all the services of z/OS available. And with z/OS UNIX, the existing investment in z/OS applications and data is protected. New applications will have access to existing data. Now what are open systems? Based on requirements from customers, the characteristics of an open system environment can be expressed by the following elements. First there's portability. This is the ability to relocate system resources, such as applications, data, and people, between processing environments of differing design and architecture. There's also interoperability. This defines the ability to interconnect systems from different vendors and have them work together to solve a business problem. And finally, there's investment protection which is the ability to choose components from offerings of many vendors, protocols, and architectures with the confidence that they will work together. In an open system environment, a set of standards can provide the ability to interoperate and port applications, data, and people on different operating platforms. The vendor names shown here are just an example, but the point is it's this defined set of standards in the middle that enable interoperability and portability of applications. There are two types of standards: de facto standards and de jure standards. De facto standards are established by broad industry usage of a technology. And De jure standards are established and accepted by recognized standards bodies through a formal voting process. The Single UNIX Specification (SUS) is the collective name of a family of standards for computer operating systems, compliance with which is required to qualify for using the "UNIX" trademark. If an operating system is submitted to The Open Group for certification, and passes conformance tests, then it is deemed to be compliant with a UNIX standard. z/OS UNIX meets these open system requirements. UNIX applications which conform to XPG4.2 standards can be ported to z/OS. These can be vendor applications or self-developed applications. Now does this mean every UNIX application should run on Z? Of course not, but applications that require true enterprise server qualities of service are well suited. If your application has high DASD requirements, high security needs, or needs a high level of reliability then you'll see a lot of benefit in moving that application to z/OS UNIX. In the next video we'll look at how UNIX is implemented with z/OS.
Unix Implementation of z/OS:
Let's start with a quick bit of background of how UNIX was implemented before z/OS.The name Open Edition was used by when this support was introduced in MVS.
At that time, IBM did not have the right to call it UNIX.The term Open Edition (OE) is still seen in some documentation. IBM now has the right to use the word UNIX after the full UNIX branding was obtained in 1996. The z/OS UNIX support is now known as UNIX System Services and is often called USS in the manuals. When this UNIX support became available, the role of an MVS system changed. This opened up new opportunities for MVS, OS/390, and now z/OS. UNIX applications can be ported from other UNIX environments to run on z/OS UNIX System Services; however, porting might not be trivial; the problem of ASCII and EBCDIC must be addressed which we'll get to a little later. Let's see how workstation users can get access to z/OS applications and data. With z/OS UNIX, workstation users can access traditional MVS applications and data as well as POSIX and XPG4.2 conforming applications and data on z/OS. The diagram shows that a workstation application using Motif and X Windows can access data on a z/OS system. Motif refers to both a graphical user interface (GUI) specification and the widget toolkit for building applications that follow that specification under the X Window System on Unix operating systems. The X Window System is the underlying graphics system on all modern UNIX systems. X Windows provides the facilities to accept input from a mouse and keyboard, and the ability to draw graphical objects to a computer screen. It is supported by all major workstation vendors. X Windows is a TCP/IP application and comes as part of the TCP/IP product for z/OS. The box on the picture that contains the X Windows client in the diagram symbolizes the X Windows API on z/OS. Let's see how high speed storage devices on z/OS can be useful for workstations. The DFSMS/MVS product on z/OS provides data administration functions like backup and archiving of data on a z/OS system. With z/OS UNIX, DFSMS/MVS can be used to back up and archive the hierarchical file system. A workstation application might be moved to z/OS if backup is critical. An alternative solution is to use the Tivoli Storage Manager product on z/OS which can periodically upload data on the workstation and archive it on the host. Either way, folks want to use the same tools and applications to backup and restore individual z/OS UNIX files residing in z/OS File System (zFS) data sets as other z/OS data sets. Enhancements to backup and restore individual z/OS UNIX files residing in zFS data sets is integrated into existing DFSMShsm backup / recover and DFSMSdss dump / restore capability, allowing for centralized data management across the z/OS platform. z/OS is well suited to be a server for batch applications because of its large processing capacity, high speed printers, and high reliability and availability. Large batch applications can be moved from a workstation to z/OS. z/OS UNIX shell scripts which are similar to REXX execs can run in the shell session or they can be submitted as a z/OS batch job. BPXBATCH is a utility that you can use to run shell commands or executable files through the batch facility. You can invoke BPXBATCH from a batch job or from the TSO/E environment (as a command, through a CALL command, or from a CLIST or REXX EXEC). So, we've seen some of the opportunities and some of the new ways to use z/OS with z/OS UNIX. Let's look at two exploiters of these facilities: IBM HTTP Server and WebSphere Application Server. Both provide a web server environment for z/OS. This server is a standard-compliant product which requires z/OS UNIX and its file system. It uses the POSIX threading standard, enabling one server to handle multiple client requests. The home pages stored on z/OS reside in the hierarchical file system or a z/OS PDS or PDS/E. There are also services and samples provided to show access from a web browser through the z/OS WebSphere and Liberty servers to CICS and DB2 data. This is a way to bring your older transaction and processing applications to new users through the Internet. In the next video we'll take a look at the components of z/OS UNIX.

z/OS unit component:
z/OS UNIX is made up of system and application services. There's a system application programming interface or system API which is a set of C language function calls and the operating system interfaces that support them. Some services are also accessible through assembler language. There are shell and utility interactive interfaces to z/OS UNIX services. A hierarchical file system is a byte-oriented file system familiar to UNIX programmers. And DBX or debugger for UNIX is an interactive tool for debugging C and C++ language applications that use z/OS UNIX services. The picture here shows how z/OS UNIX, the shell interface, and the API relate to the rest of the z/OS operating system. Here we see the API interface and shell interface leading into Language Environment which executes the shell and utilities. BCP is the Base Control Program. We have multiple file systems: Hierarchical File System, z/OS File System, and Network File System.  Support is going away for the HFS data structure used by the z/OS UNIX environment, so you'll want to migrate your HFS to zFS, and enjoy the performance gains that comes from that. The UNIX file system is hierarchical and byte oriented. Finding a file in this file system is done by searching a directory or a series of directories. There is no concept of a z/OS catalog that points directly to a file. A path name identifies a file and consists of directory names and a file name. A fully qualified file name, which consists of the name of each directory in the path to a file plus the file name itself, can be up to 1023 bytes long. The hierarchical file system allows for file names in mixed case. Like UNIX, z/OS UNIX is case sensitive to file and directory names. For example, in the same directory the file MYFILE in uppercase is a different file than myfile in lowercase. The z/OS UNIX shell and utilities is the interactive interface for users. It provides a command interface to the z/OS UNIX environment. A user gets access to the shell by either logging on to TSO/E or by using the remote login facilities of TCP/IP (rlogin), by using Telnet or SSH. If they use TSO/E, a command called OMVS creates a shell for the user. The user then works within the shell environment until exiting or temporarily switching back to the TSO/E environment. If they enter z/OS through the rlogin or Telnet capabilities of TCP/IP, a shell environment is automatically created for them, and they have limited access to TSO services. The shell is a command interpreter which accepts commands defined in the XPG4.2 standard. Some commands call programs called utilities. The shell user can create named lists of shell commands, called a shell script, which becomes a powerful new command. The shell provides support to invoke the ISPF editor to edit and browse HFS files for the TSO/E user. For the non-TSO users, the vi editor is supported. UNIX System Services are included in the z/OS system. Support is provided for enhanced ASCII functionality. Enhanced ASCII makes it easier to port internationalized applications developed on or for ASCII platforms to z/OS platforms by providing conversion from ASCII to EBCDIC and from EBCDIC to ASCII. There's support to make it easier to shut down and restart the UNIX System Services environment. And support is also provided to allow access control lists (ACLs) to be used to control access to UNIX files and directories by individual user IDs and group IDs. This support provides greater granularity of access than the existing permission bit support. And the key point here is what distinguishes z/OS UNIX from other variants is that UNIX System Services are integrated into the z/OS base instead of added as middleware or shipped as a separate operating system. As a result, not only can UNIX applications be written for the IBM Z platform, they can also take advantage of the z/OS facilities and IBM Z server hardware to obtain enterprise level qualities of service. The z/OS system includes application enablement services that provide support for object oriented technology, a common run-time environment, and tools for creating new user interfaces to traditional z/OS applications. Programmers can develop and run traditional z/OS applications, UNIX applications, ported Windows applications, and java and WebSphere applications, just to name a few. A C++ compiler is also provided to simplify the porting of applications to z/OS. Another real benefit of running UNIX applications on IBM Z is that those applications can run on the System z integrated information processor or zIIP. When configured with general purpose processors within logical partitions running z/OS, zIIPs might help increase general purpose processor productivity and might contribute to lowering the overall cost of computing for z/OS Java technology-based applications and some other UNIX-based workloads like XML and CIM. zIIPs are designed to operate asynchronously with the general processors to execute Java programming under control of the IBM Java virtual machine (JVM). This can help reduce the demands and capacity requirements on general purpose processors which might then be available for reallocation to other IBM z workloads. So that's a wrap of this overview. We're going to get into much more detail in the upcoming modules, starting with a more thorough introduction to z/OS UNIX.



