MODERNIZE APPLICATIONS WITH IBM CICS


Intro
Hello and welcome to this course. I'm Sophie Green and I'm a developer in the IBM CICS team based in the Software Development Lab in Hursley, UK. Over this course we're going to explain why CICS is perfect for powering the next generation of enterprise applications and how you can help to build them. If you haven't already, we'd strongly recommend that you take both the Introduction to CICS video course as well as the Introduction to COBOL video course, as these will really help to explain some of the key concepts that we're going to be building upon. It would also help if you have a basic understanding of Java, but don't be scared off if you don't. During the course, there's going to be a mixture of lecture-style sessions as well as labs that you can use to really help cement your knowledge. We can also provide you with a provisioned environment for you to use during the labs if needed. By the end of this course, you should understand why IBM CICS has been the trusted core of enterprise applications and why through years of innovation, this trust is really maintained. You will experience writing, updating and running CICS applications, as well as the new APIs, capabilities and functions that will allow you to modernize these applications to run as part of a hybrid cloud application. Sound interesting? Of course it does, so let's get started. As you already know, CICS is a mixed language application server that runs on IBM Z. Enterprises have used the qualities of service that CICS provides to allow them to create high-throughput, secure, transactional applications that have really powered their business. As the IT landscape has evolved, so has CICS to allow these applications to integrate with new platforms and therefore still provide value to the rest of the business. Because of this capability, a lot of businesses still rely on CICS to power their core applications. When CICS debuted, the IT landscape was primarily dominated by batch processing. Any time a record was updated, for example a bank account or customer details, these changes would all be batched together with other changes and then applied sequentially to the main records. CICS introduced the ability to update that record immediately without the need for a batch window to run. CICS would handle all of the transactionality of the processing without the application programmer having to worry about for example what to do if the record you want to update is locked. As the landscape moved to embrace online transactions, CICS introduced capabilities to support different programming styles such as conversational and pseudo-conversational. These allowed throughput to increase as more people could update records at the same time. Today, the cloud has dramatically changed the IT landscape again. Being able to make use of services, functions and platforms as a service allows organisations to create amazing digital experiences for their clients. However, at the heart of these experiences is still the core applications hosted by CICS. Since 89% of enterprises predict needing to harness multiple public and private, or on-premise clouds, we call this landscape the hybrid multi-cloud. Migrating to the hybrid cloud requires clients to look at their existing IT assets and decide how they can migrate them to the cloud. And there are three possible methods to achieve this. The first, and probably the simplest, is to maintain the status quo, or just keep the existing applications working. Although this doesn't incur any extra costs or introduce any new risk, the application might then fall behind technologically. This might eventually incur problems as the business tries to embed these applications into new digital experiences. The second method is to migrate all of their applications to the cloud as cloud -native applications. This is not only a high-risk approach, as there's no guarantee that the migrated application will have the same performance, security or transactional capabilities as the one that it's replacing, but it's also quite an expensive approach. Not only is the cost of the migration likely to be higher, but you'll also have to maintain the existing applications until that migration is complete, thus incurring further costs. The final method, and perhaps the best, is to modernize the applications that you already have, allowing them to integrate with cloud-native applications. This modernization could be achieved either by constructing APIs that allow new cloud-native applications to connect to your existing assets, rewriting parts of your application in new languages and then hosting them back on CICS, or by using CICS capabilities to extend your applications to provide new capabilities and functions. And this is exactly the type of modernization that we're going to be focusing on during this course. What we're going to do is we're going to take a traditional example application, show you how it works, and then through the course we're going to extend it, rewrite bits of it, and then apply and enable it. While doing so, we will explain how CICS applications can make use of continuous integration and continuous delivery to allow you to deliver, test and deploy code into CICS easily and with quality. But we have to start with the most famous example ever, Hello World. It would be really rude not to. If you did the previous COBOL course you will have written a small program that did nothing but write Hello World. So let's do the same but for CICS. Here is the COBOL batch program that's created at the beginning of the COBOL course. As we've already explained, CICS provides application programming interfaces or APIs to programs to allow them to interact with resources. So here's the same code, but using CICS APIs to write the same string to the terminal. Here we're looking at the identification division of our COBOL program. Here we can see that our program is called Hello, and then it's in the procedure division that the interesting stuff happens. We have two API calls here. One to write the string hello world to the terminal that started the program and then one to let CICS know that this program has completed. Obviously the applications that CICS customers use are going to be a lot more complex than this. They're going to interact with a lot more than just a console but the basic building blocks are the same. Take what you learned from the COBOL course, add in the CICS APIs to allow you to write enterprise applications. And that is what customers have been doing for over 50 years, so let's have a look at one of their applications next.


Programming Models
CICS has been around for more than 50 years and has built over 25 different versions since it was first developed. Let's explore some of the major application enhancements that have occurred over the years. To understand why CICS was created and why it has been so popular over the years, we need to understand the change in the programming models that took place in the early 70s. With the invention of devices that could interact directly with a user, the programming model had to change to support what was back then only moderately faster machines. Prior to the invention of the green screen, which today many people describe as old and outdated, there just simply were no screens. Data was processed in a batch manner. Whole files were fed into a program sequentially and the results were only fed back once all records were processed. In fact, sometime the data was fed in using punch cards. Although batch programming is still used today, the world is very interactive. We have more storage on our smartphones than we had on our mainframes 20 years ago. So, in the 1970s, when computers became faster and processor needs became more immediate, IBM built CICS as one of the first transaction processors. The idea was simple. The user is now a person, not a machine or a file. Therefore, the interaction will be shorter, but access to data is completely random. Since the user is waiting for a response, the processing time must be extremely fast, and in most cases, sub-second. A good example of this in our everyday life is when we pay for something using a credit card by swiping it or tapping it on a machine. The longer it takes for a response to come back, the less customers you can transact with in that period of time. In order to process data in a more immediate fashion, an interactive customer is using a 3270-like screen. A new set of programming paradigms have to be considered. As you can see, the word conversation appears in each of the programming styles, as it assumes that you are having a conversation. This is usually a conversation between the system and the end user. The idea is you have a beginning and an end to these conversations, but what happens in between can be completely different. In the case of a non-conversational transaction, there is a start and an end, but they run together, so the transaction is complete within one iteration. You can think of this as an API call where the result is available immediately and there's no need to continue once the result is received. for example requesting the balance of your checking account it requires you to provide the account number and then you receive the bank balance back any other work you want to perform is not directly tied to that one request conversational on the other hand requires you to provide several inputs where the path is decided based on the inputs themselves this interaction means that the program needs to respond to an input with a request for additional input. All of this will eventually produce a final result but it will take an uncertain path through the program to get there. What makes the programming style conversational is that every time a response for input is sent to the user the system waits for the user to respond. The program is suspended and any resources acquired by the program will remain locked until the final outcome is achieved. A great example of this is a menu system. The first screen will prompt the user for several options, and then when the user responds, the program will determine the next processing leg. So, why the need for the last program in style? Just imagine a user enters a transaction that produces a screen and gets a phone call before they respond. They remain on the phone for an hour. As the program is suspended, holding resources until they respond, this would not allow for many users on a system as the inconsistency alone would be hard to predict. The last programming style has the benefits of non-conversational programming that allows for the requirements conversational. Pseudo-conversational programming has the programmer end the task, and therefore the program, right after it responds to the user with a prompt for input. This way, the latency associated with user think time is completely removed from the picture. Sounds great, right? But how does this affect the underlying program? Well, the program must have the ability to be restarted where it left off when the user finally responds. In order to do this, some state information must be kept in the system that allows the program to know where it left off and keep any data required to restart in the middle of that conversation. This area is known as the COMMAREA or communication area. Although there are newer methods to keep state information between pseudo-conversations, the COMMAREA is still heavily used, not only to hold state data for CICS programs, it's also used to pass information between different programs, as you'll see later on in the course. With the adoption of the pseudo -conversational programming style, CICS regions were able to host many users running the same or different applications. However, in the mid-70s, address spaces were still only 16MB. So, the biggest limitation to add in more users and programs was space. One of the solutions was to create separate CICS address spaces known as regions that were dedicated to individual services. Regions that hosted terminals were labelled TORs, the ones that housed applications are known as AORs, and data services would move to FORs or DORs. At the same time, instead of creating a single program for whole applications, development was broken down into categories. The categories initially created to closely match the region demarcations, but soon the industry adopted a modular programming style to allow for the maximum reuse of common routines. These developments caused applications to be split into many individual modules, run over possibly multiple regions, and a modern CICS application was born. As a result, CICS programming today is divided into three main categories. The first is the presentation layer. This layer is used for all communication with the end user. The advantage of using a separate presentation layer is the ability to swap out or add new forms of presentation without affecting the back-end business logic of the application itself. Just imagine the transition from terminals to tablets to mobile phones for the services we use today. Each can have different requirements for how data is presented to the display, but only require a change to one category to support the new device. Most presentation services have all but moved from CICS, as other platforms tend to be more suitable for that kind of processing. HTML pages that contain items such as radio buttons or selection lists can be easily processed at the local client, but CICS is simply used as the delivery mechanism to deliver those pages. Business logic, on the other hand, is where you perform the work on the customer data and is still primarily processed by application programs in CICS. Although customers have incorporated new languages such as Java and Node .js into these applications, the core COBOL applications remain as it would take many years to replace them all. What's more is that CICS along with z/OS provides the ability to handle massive workloads of security, integrity and performance unmatched by other platforms. Customers have attempted to rewrite whole CICS applications on other platforms and rarely have been able to match the reliability, integrity, and performance. Besides, if you take an application as a whole and rewrite it in another language for running on another platform and match the CICS performance, what would you have in the end? A big bill and the same thing that you started with. The last layer is the data services layer. Even though many customers have chosen not to separate data access from business logic, as you can imagine, the housing and access of data can change. One minute, you're using VSAM files to house your data, the next you have the need to query that data. With a separate data layer, the storage and retrieval of data is left to a module that can be replaced as requirements change. Some would even argue that the module in this layer can be used to go to other platforms through web services to retrieve data, whose underlying storage methodology is unknown to the program request in it. Either way, over the years the separation of services has allowed CICS applications to be easily and quickly incorporated into newer applications and in some cases with little or no changes to the underlying programs at all.


CICS Application
In this course, we will be using a sample application to describe some features within CICS and for our lab exercises. A payroll application is a good example of a service that has been hosted in CICS for years by many large organisations. The sample programme we're using has been concentrated to some simple functions so that the complexity of the source code is reduced. As this class continues, you'll be able to see some of the basic concepts described earlier implemented within this application. The transaction ID used is P-A-Y-R. When entered on a blank CICS screen, the initial program invoked is PAYPGM. This program contains the presentation logic for the application and will determine the state. For example, the first time through the program there will be no state data, so the program determines it is time to send the initial screen, which in CICS is known as a map. Maps can be stored in something known as a map set, which can contain more than one map for the application. The map used in our application is called STUDMAP. After the first time through the program must query the state data to determine if it's in the middle of a function such as update or if the request is simply a display of a record. Input to this program is supplied via the 3270 screen. It accepts a one byte department number and a five byte employee number. Entering these values and pressing the Enter key or a function key drives the re-running of the PAYPGM program, this time to read the values entered and determine the function to run. The only field validation done by this program is the department and employee field. They must be physically entered as they are required fields and they must also be numeric. All other field validation for things such as date have been removed to simplify the logic. Once PAYPGM has validated these fields, it will determine the function the user is requesting. The program will build these into a communication area called the COMMAREA and will pass to the PAYBUS to process them. PAYBUS is the business logic program for this application. It will determine the function requested, such as add or delete, and invoke the necessary section of the code to process the request. Although this may seem relatively simplistic and non-conversational, it is actually a true pseudo -conversational example due to the interaction with the 3270 screen. Let's imagine you want to add a new employee. You enter a department and an employee number, but the rest of the screen appears to be locked. On entry to the pay program, the program determines that this is an add request and calls PAYBUS to verify that this person does not already exist. If that is the case, then it will return that information to PAYPGM, which will respond to the user by sending the screen, unlocking the fields to allow the add to proceed. It is only when the user enters all the data and requests the add a second time that the record is added. Therefore, add is a two-step process that requires a conversation. The code used is pseudo-conversational and is a good example of how that processing takes place. Finally, for simplicity, the data is stored on VSAM KSDS, a key sequence data set file, so the data portion was not separated into a separate program. CICS is a resource -driven system that requires most resources to be defined to the system prior to its use. Although this is not usually the function of an application programmer, it is important to understand because if it's missing, an application that may rely on that resource will not function correctly. As you embark on the road of programming in CICS, you will quickly learn that there is a partnership between the application developer and the CICS system programmer. CICS was designed originally as a table-driven system, which means if a resource is required in a CICS region, it must first be defined to the resource table for that resource. If not, the resource will not be available in that CICS environment. The function of defining resources was relegated to the CICS systems programmer as he or she designs the environment and chooses where different pieces of an application runs. He or she is also responsible for setting the attributes of that resource definition so it best utilises what that particular environment has to offer. An example of this is a VSAM file as we mentioned earlier. The file may live in the same region as the application or the systems programmer can choose to put that file in a different region. They can manipulate the definitions and CICS to accomplish either as far as the application is concerned or function the same. In terms of attributes, the systems programmer may decide this is a critical file, and then they can set it up to be automatically backed up if a failure occurs during application processing. Coordination between the application's developer and the systems programmer is usually required to set all attributes correctly. However, if the programmer is simply looking to extend an existing application where the resources are already defined and require no additional CICS resources, then this could be accomplished by the application developer without the system's programmer's interaction. As the world moved from 3270 green screens to browsers, IBM provided several modernisation techniques to allow CICS applications to thrive in the new world. One of the early application modernisation in CICS was called the 3270 Web Bridge. This allowed a programmer to get the HTML representation of their map produced when the map was assembled. This, along with a program supplied by CICS called DFH -WBTTA, allowed the application to run from a browser with no changes to any of the application. The screens are primitive, but CICS supplied utilities to try and make them look a bit more like web screens. As customers embarked on the path of separating presentation logic from business logic, IBM created features such as CICS Web Support and Web Services, which allowed the programmer to bypass the presentation layer and simply pass data directly to the business logic. These features support passing the data as name value pairs for HTML pages and as XML for consumptions by a client web service. With these new features, CICS allows a programmer to turn the backend business logic into an XML-based service. Today there is even support for the creation of RESTful services using JSON with various free and for purchase utilities allowing CICS applications to be supported by mobile applications or any other applications within the enterprise. Other modernizations include the ability for CICS applications to be clients of external web services. An example of this being a CICS application that used to pay an external service for address scrubbing, which is now calling a free service on the web to provide the same functionality. In order to assist with application development, CICS provides several transactions or built-in functions, known as the CICS-supplied transactions, that provide the ability to build and test CICS application programs. CICS supplies over 30 of these transactions that provide both system and application programmers the ability to monitor, control and build applications in CICS. These transactions are documented in a manual titled CICS Supplied Transaction Reference. Rather than trying to cover them all, we have highlighted a few that are most used by CICS application programmers while developing applications. Each of these provide application programmers the ability to test, debug and modify data associated with an application. The two most used transactions are CECI and CEDF. CECI, which stands for the CICS Executive Command Interpreter, gives you the ability to test a CICS command before coding it in an application program. In addition, it runs the command in most cases so the changes made will be permanent in the system. For example, if you delete a record from a file using CECI, it will permanently delete the record from the file. CECS works the same way as CECI, however it will not execute the command. It will simply syntax check it so that a programmer knows exactly what attributes are required to properly code the command into a program. Another one of the built-in transactions is the CICS Execution Diagnostic Facility, CEDF. CICS provides two such transactions that you can use for testing and following the flow of application programs without having to supply special program testing procedures. It too has a sister transaction called CEDX, which allows the testing of non-terminal-based applications, as it can be entered with an application transaction as input to test on 3270's screen, even though the underlying transition being captured is not terminal-based. To try this, simply type CEDF on a blank screen and the message returned will let you know CEDF is active. Clear the screen and type in the application transaction, which in our case is PAYR. The following screen will be displayed. Note that CEDX works the same way, however it is entered as CEDX, a space, and then the user transaction. CEDX will capture that transaction on the user's current screen should then run it in an environment whether on a terminal or not. CEDF allows you to intercept your application programs at the program's initiation at each CICS command and at the program termination. CEDF helps you to isolate and focus on problems in your application programs. You'll get to try CEDF in the lab that is associated with this section, so enjoy.


CICS Application Programming Interface
In this module, we're going to look at how to code your application programs to run in CICS. You heard during the introduction that CICS is a mixed-language application server that runs on IBM Z. As an application server, CICS hosts and provides services to application programs. In this type of environment, CICS manages resources on behalf of the application. This allows the application programmer to concentrate on coding the business logic without having to think about specific characteristics of CICS resources. For example, CICS will open and close files so that the COBOL program doesn't need any file descriptor entries in the Files section of the COBOL program. So, how does your program request access to CICS resources? Well, CICS provides an application programming interface, an API, which gives the application program access to CICS services. The API consists of several parts, including a command-level programming language, commonly known as the EXEC CICS interface. This EXEC CICS interface passes requests for CICS services via an Exec infrastructure. The interface updates a control block called the EIB, with the status of the current CICS request being executed by the application. There's a CICS language translator which turns the EXEC CICS commands into COBOL statements that then call the exec interface. We'll look in more detail at what the translator does later. The EXEC CICS command is the bit that goes in your COBOL program. For each request to access a CICS resource, the command must be coded in the application logic. The command starts with EXEC CICS, which is short for execute CICS. This EXEC CICS string tells the command level translator that an API command has been found. Then there is the command itself. This determines the function being performed on the CICS resource. There are over 340 of these commands available. A complete list can be found in the knowledge centre if you want to see what they all are. Then the command is followed by one and what options and their arguments. And then we finish the command with the string END-EXEC. If we look in the knowledge centre at what these commands are, we see a summary of each command. We see a schematic diagram which illustrates the syntax and a description of the command. We also see a list of the available options and their usage, along with a list of the condition responses that can be returned by CICS for that command, and finally an example of the command actually being used. The schematic diagrams, or you might hear them referred to as railroad diagrams, are essential to the application programmer. They explain exactly what can be specified on an EXEC CICS command. This may sound a bit daunting but luckily modern editors can supply context assist to help you when you're writing your code. To make sense of the schematic diagrams you need to understand their conventions or their rules. The same rules apply to all commands and the rules can also be found in the knowledge centre. Let's explain it by looking at a simple example using the payroll system application. Our program PAYBUS needs to read a record from a file called payroll with the key stored in a variable ws key. The data is to be returned to a working storage variable called payroll record. Looking at the schematic diagram for a read shows that options FILE and RIDFLD which is the record key are mandatory. Options INTO and SET are alternatives but you must provide one of them. The other options are optional so based on this our code in the program looks like this where EXEC CICS tells the translator that a CICS command is starting. The command in this case would be a read and you need three options containing arguments. File will give it the file name payroll, RIDFLD which will give the record key WS key and into which is the location in your program where CICS will place the record and this is going to be our payroll record and then the command is terminated with the string END-EXEC. The argument for file is hard-coded with the string payroll which is why it's in quote marks but the other arguments ws key and payroll record are variables in the work in storage section of our COBOL program. In the program called paybus it looks like this. When this command executes the API will pass the read arguments via the exec interface through to CICS. CICS service modules will interact with VSAM to access the file and retrieve the record, sending the contents back to the program's working storage field. But these EXEC CICS commands are not reserve words in COBOL or any other language, so how can the compiler understand it? Remember that command level translator we mentioned earlier? Well, it runs in conjunction with the COBOL compiler, either integrated with the COBOL compiler or as a separate pre-compile step. The translator converts the EXEC CICS API command into COBOL statements. Let us take a look at the translator output for our read example. You can see that the EXEC CICS command is commented out and replaced by COBOL statements. These COBOL statements call the exec stub, named dfh-ei1, passing the COBOL option arguments Payroll, WS key and Payroll record, key I and area O. The translator also copies the EIB copybook DFH-EIB-LK and DFHCOMMAREA into the linkage section and the EIB copybook DFH-EIB -LK and DFHCOMMAREA are in the procedure division header after the using phrase. Based on this knowledge, we can update our flow diagram. When the COBOL program executes the EXEC CICS command, it links to the exec stub, dfh-ei1, using the code placed in the program by the CICS translator. The stub locates the exec interface programs and branches to them. The interface passes a request into the CICS service module to access the record. On the return through the interface, the EIB is updated with the status of the command. Control is then passed back to our application. So, with all that going on, how do we know if the command is successful? When returned to your program, the response from CICS is split across two EIB fields, EIB -RESP and EIB-RESP2. The response code in each field consists of a two-digit decimal condition number. These response codes are what we saw earlier in the Knowledge Centre, where it told us what response codes could be returned for our command. Given that you know the list of response codes that can be returned, your program should test for these conditions after the EXEC CICS command completes for expected conditions. If the command is successful then the eibResp value will always contain zero, meaning normal condition. There may be several reasons for an error condition in eibResp, if so then eibResp2 is used to further qualify the condition. So how do you check for the response code in your program? If you simply code RESP and RESP2 options on the command with the work in storage variable as their argument, then CICS will place the eibResp and eibResp2 values in the working storage variables as the call returns. The working storage variables rc and rc2 can then be tested using CICS' built-in function dfhResp with the condition as the argument. In this case the program is testing for the not found condition. Where a built-in function is used in the program, like dfhResp, the translator will replace this with the correct eibResp equivalent. So, DFHRESP not found will be changed to the condition number if not found, which is 13. We've looked at what is needed to run your application programs in CICS. Using the CICS API, your program has access to the many services that CICS can provide. But why would you want to use CICS to access a VSAM file? We've already mentioned that CICS is a powerful mixed-language application server. CICS provides a secure, reliable online environment, enabling high levels of concurrent access to files and databases, ensuring integrity of these files by recovering any in-flight errors back to a point of consistency. And this explains why most Fortune 500 companies use CICS as the host for their mission -critical applications.


CICS COBOL Presentation Logic
The only way to truly understand the concepts described in earlier sections is to have a look at the code that makes up the Payroll application. If you recall there were two programs, PAYPGM and PAYBUS, that make up the presentation and business logic of our application. PAYPGM is the presentation logic program that collects information from the screen which includes the user's desired function and passes it to the business logic program for processing using a CICS LINK command. They communicate via a COMMAREA, the communication area, which we'll explore first. The COMMAREA appears in the Working Storage section of PAYPGM with its field name specified and in the Linkage section of PAYPGM as a placeholder for future invocations. In PAYBUS, the fields appear and are used through the Linkage section. The reason for this is that PAYPGM will create the COMMAREA out of Working Storage the first time through with the initial values. On subsequent requests, PAYPGM will move the data from linkage to working storage to process any of the field data. This is a standard that can be seen in many CICS programs. Looking at the actual fields in the COMMAREA, the first 10 bytes need to be collected and passed to the business logic program PAYBUS. More specifically, the 4 byte request followed by a 1 byte department number and a 5 byte employee number. This makes up the data that needs to be collected from the user. The remainder of the COMMAREA is either data from the record being retrieved and displayed on the screen or a set of 1-byte indicators to provide the state information. They are represented as flags and can either be an N or a Y. Initially they're all set to be N and as we progress through the program logic we will see when they change. Next let's have a look at the first time through processing. This processing will be different depending on the programmer's preference or if COMM- AREAs are not used for example if you use channels and containers instead but otherwise it's the most common popular method of determining first entry into a program. The first bit of code is to get the time and the date using CICS commands. These are displayed on the screen every time the user presses a key as they appear at the top of the procedure division. The EIB or execute interface block which was explored earlier on is automatically inserted into CICS programs. It has many useful fields on entry. One is EIB C-A-L-E -N which contains the COMMAREA length. If the COMMAREA length is zero there is no COMMAREA so this is the first time through using COMMAREA. Otherwise if the user ends this task with a COMMAREA which we will see then on subsequent calls it will never be zero. The first time through this program the BMS map is prepped with the time, the date and a message to the user to enter some data and then the map is sent. It is the return command with tran ID and COMMAREA option that is most interesting. You can see that the return is nominating the next transaction to run using EIB tran ID which is the current transaction ID. This means should the user press enter or a function key the very same transaction PAYR will run. You can see how the COMMAREA to be passed to the next implication of this program is coded. Now we will explore some standard programming found in a presentation logic program. We will start with an evaluation of the function requested and move on to receiving the data from the screen. As you can see from the evaluate statement, the key that the user pressed is passed to a CICS program in an EIB field called EIB AID. The program is structured to evaluate the key and set the request based on the key pressed. Once done, a routine called do work is performed and then you can see a familiar CICS return statement that nominates the successor transaction with COMMAREA in place. A do work paragraph starts by getting the data the user entered on the screen with a CICS receive map command. In older versions of code an error called a map failure would be possible if the user did not enter any data as CICS maps were coded not to return fields that were empty and this was to avoid data transmission of blank fields. Today the number of bytes of transmission is considered so small that it's more efficient to send all the fields entered or not than it is to run through the code to test if the field was entered. The next section of code is all about field validation. Again, this program has been structured for very simplistic field validation. Most real -life examples will have various complex routines to validate the data entered by the user. As this application requires a 1-byte department number and a 5-byte employee number to proceed, this program simply ensures that those fields have been entered and that they're numeric. If any of the fields are invalid or missing, the cursor is placed on the first invalid field and the screen is resent to the user with a message indicating a problem. Once the input validation is complete, this program will move any fields that have been entered on the screen to the COMMAREA. This is so that the business logic can then process them. Keep in mind that most fields on the screen are protected, not allowing a user to enter data. However, depending on the function we requested, such as an add, the fields could have been unprotected to allow an input. The long list of if statements are simply checking to see if the field has been entered. The program accomplishes this by checking the length returned from the receive command issued earlier. If the length is greater than zero there is data to update in the COMMAREA. Notice how the program also updates the flag associated with each new field from an n to a y. This will notify the business logic program that the data is new. The last piece of the code is the call to the business logic PAYBUS to process the request. It is a CICS LINK command where the data being passed is our COMMAREA. Rather than explore the business logic at this point, let us see what the presentation logic program does once the business logic returns to it. Keep in mind that after the link is complete, we still need to check that the command executed properly. This screen starts by checking the return code from the link command of the prior screen to see if it executed successfully. If not, you can see some common logic to return the error to the user's screen. If the command itself worked, we still need to check if the business logic program returned an error by checking an error indicator flag. If so, we return the business specific error message that was provided by the business logic program. Assuming everything worked at this point, we simply have some presentation housekeeping to do prior to returning the results of the request back to the user. As mentioned earlier, most of the fields on the screen are protected until there is a need for the user to supply input. In our application, this is only required if the user updates an employee payroll record or adds a new employee. In those specific cases, we need to modify the screen from respondent to unprotected fields. The code here calls a routine to do protection and unprotection of input fields as required by the processing. It then sends that result to the user.


CICS COBOL Application bUSINESS lOGIC
The business logic program is the core piece of a CICS application. It performs the functionality required by the application regardless of the user interface and in most cases, the data store. The business logic normally consists of a driver program that coordinates the execution of the business logic by invoking subsequent programs for different functions. In our case, it is all in one. This program is not only the entire business logic, but the data store as well. So let's have a look at what it does. Paybus receives data in its linkage section. This is passed by its caller as a COMMAREA, in this case on an EXEC CICS LINK command. The first section of code in this program is special processing for the 3270 presentation logic program. The program begins by resetting flags should a user interrupt function that is normally done in two sets using the 3270 screen. They are the functions of add, update and delete. If a user starts an update for example by pressing PF4 on the 3270 screen but then does not confirm the update with a second PF4, the flags in the COMMAREA need to be reset to say we are no longer in the middle of an update. Once any special processing is complete the business logic program will analyze the request and give control to the routine that process it. Again, had this been a more complex application this might be cause to other programs to process these requests. As we can see, the first step is an evaluation of the request. This is supplied by passing in a COMMAREA field. Based on the request type, the function is performed. The display routine is the first routine highlighted here. It is normally the routine that simply reads a record and returns the content to the caller. However, the if statement at the top implies it is also called from the forward and backward routine without first reading a record. Therefore this display routine is a generic routine for not only displaying the record but also used by other routines to move data read from the VSAM file into the COMMAREA to return to the caller. Lastly note that an error from the read command assumes that the record was not found. Of course there are other errors to contend with such as file not open as an example. We've simplified the code here however it's good practice to consider all possible errors and send a proper response. It is time to look at a more complex routine. It is recommended that the full code in such a routine a programmer should use the CICS application programmer's reference manual to determine the correct way to update a record on a VSAM file within CICS. The first complication with this routine is that it's invoked twice. The first time we'll verify that the record exists by calling the display routine and present the record back to the caller. This has two purposes. The first we just mentioned, the second is simply to unlock the field on the 3270 display so the user can update only those fields that they want to update. An example is raising a person's salary. The remainder of the record would remain unchanged but only that field would be updated. CICS allows you to update a record by adding the attribute update to a regular read command. When the update is coded, CICS expects the rewrite command to be issued next. Note that a key does not have to be passed as CICS assumes that you are updating the record from a previous read with the update attribute. The remainder of the code between the read, update and rewrite is about only updating the fields that the user has changed, leaving the remaining fields the same as they were. This is accomplished by using and testing flags sent by the caller. There is also an additional piece of logic that collects and writes a timestamp into the record. Although not utilised in this piece of code, the idea is that if two people were trying to update the record at the same time, one of the user's updates could be lost. In a production copy of this code, there would be an extra test to make sure that the timestamp of the record read and presented to the user matches the timestamp of the record being updated. If it changed, the user would be warned that the record has changed since they last saw it and that the update would fail. The next question I would have as a programmer is what happens if the transaction abends or fails in the middle of an update? Would the new data or the old data be displayed on a lookup? The answer is that it depends. The system's programmer controls whether a VSAM file is recoverable. If it is, any changes to the record are backed out if a failure occurs. If this is not set, then the update will take place. It's therefore important to have discussion with the system programmer about an application's needs when dealing with issues such as recovery. The next function is adding a record. It too is a two-step process like an update. The first time through the add logic, the program simply checks if the record exists. If so, it sends back the record with a message that it's already on the file. If the record does not exist, this program will clear all the fields that are required for adding a new record and return to the caller. In the case of the 3270 Presentation Logic program, this gives it the chance to unlock the fields given the user the ability to enter the new fields. On the second request, it adds the record presented by the user. Note it also places a timestamp in the record as mentioned earlier for use with the update As with an update, should a failure occur during the run of this transaction the record may or may not be added, depending on the recoverability of a file The next function to look at is a delete request The delete request is also interesting, as it is also a two -step process where a user presses PF6 to invoke a delete when entering a department and an employee The first time through this, the program simply calls the display routine to return the record back to the caller that they're about to delete. Pressing PF6 the second time invokes the delete code. Interestingly, the first thing this program will do as part of step 2 is a read with the update flag on the record about to be deleted. This is to ensure we lock the record, verifying that no other customer is in the middle of an update. Once the read executes, we have the record locked so we can subsequently delete it. The last bit of code that we will look at in this program is the browse forward and backward. As the code is practically identical between the two, we'll describe the two together. The concept of browsing through a keyed file is not new, but one that is used by many products when accessing a keyed file. In the case of CICS, you can see that we start with a start command. This command is presented with the key in which to start browsing from with the attribute gteq. gteq means greater than or equal to. This allows the positioning of the pointer to the record requested or the next one if this record does not exist. So if a customer wanted department 1, employee 1 and it does not exist, the system will automatically position the pointer to the next available record for the browse forward and the previous record for the browse backwards. Should a not found condition be returned it means we are at the front or back of the file so we will notify the user that there are no more records prior or after that key. The next set of commands at first glance appear to be a bug. Why would a programmer code two of the exact same commands on one right after the other? Well in this example they are READPREV commands to browse backwards however you can check that if we are browsing forward we still see two commands called READNEXT. The answer in the case of READPREV is that we are already pointing to the next record to read. The first READPREV positions us at the current record, the next one backs up to the prior record. Had we not done two of these we would end up reading the same record over and over again. As you can imagine, READNEXT works the same way. The first READNEXT reads the current record as that is where we are positioned. The next READNEXT will read the record following the current record. Lastly you can see that an end file condition means we are at the start or end of the file depending on if we're going forwards or backwards so we return that error. Also a start browse holds a pointer to the file it's good code and etiquette to end the browse as soon as there are no more plans to browse the records. Ending the task would work as well however if someone added code to this program and they didn't notice we were still in a browse it would cause problems in the future. Therefore this program ends the browse as soon as it has no more need to browse any more records.


Modernization Using Channels and Containers
When considering the modernisation of an application, the first pass should focus on the functionality that is still valid versus older functionality that can be ignored as it is no longer applicable in the new environment. Here is a copy of a departmental browse screen that was available in the original application. It was invoked by entering a department and employee on the main screen and then pressing PF9 which displayed the current screen. Based on the fact that the screen size only allowed 10 employee records, the corresponding code browsed an entire department placing each record in the temporary storage queue in CICS, and then rendering the screen with the first 10 employee records. The user could page through the contents of the department by using this screen and pressing PF11 to move forward and PF10 to move backwards through the records. As the presentation logic was moved from a 3270 screen to a browser which could handle all of the records with a scrollbar, the code was removed reducing the size and complexity of both the presentation and business logic modules. A client can simply call the business logic program several times to retrieve all of the records in a department and display them in any way that they prefer and this is just one example of how to modernize. Another example would be to convert the COMMAREA from using a COMMAREA to the use of channels and containers. The channel and containers interface was added in 2005 to address a growing problem in the world of CICS. The size of data that needed to be stored between pseudo conversations or passed between programs was getting larger. The maximum size of the COMMAREA could never exceed 32k due to the field used to hold and specify the length of the COMMAREA. Another issue was that customers were overloading the COMMAREA with data from various different sources even if the program that was getting control did not make direct use of it and this was done to ensure that some program in the link chain would eventually have access to the data and the easiest way to pass it was in the COMMAREA. The solution provided was channels and containers. This interface uses a 16 character channel name as an anchor and then 16 character container names to hold the data. In theory you can create an unlimited number of containers in a channel and they can be unlimited in size. This allows CICS to once and for all resolve both a 32k COMMAREA limitation as well as the overloaded copybook issue that results when using a COMMAREA. The presentation and business logic programs we've been looking at don't have the issue of COMMAREA size, but the newer channel and containers interface can make it easier for external systems to call the business logic program with this interface. So let's explore the changes required to modernize this application to use channels and containers. When converting to the usage channels and containers, the linkage section is no longer required. As the data must be physically placed and retrieved from a container in a channel, we can simply provide the copybooks in the working storage. If we choose, we can have a separate input and output container. In fact, we can have a separate container for each structure. Each separate area will require an additional named container, and when passed to a receiving program, it can choose which containers it has an interest in viewing and or replacing. For simplicity, we're just going to use one container to hold the contents of our old COMMAREA. In the code, you can see that the major difference is that the data must be read from a container prior to its use. This is done with the get command. As we are also relied on the COMMAREA length field, EIBCALEN, to determine first -time through logic, the code on the left replaces both the receiving of our data as well as the first -time-through logic. Now we simply get our data from our channel called payroll out of a container named old COMMAREA. If this command fails then this is the first time through. On the right hand side you can see that we replaced the return with the COMMAREA by building a routine that puts the data into the container prior to the return command which now references the channel rather than the COMMAREA. We have converted all return with COMMAREA commands throughout this program to perform this routine prior to exiting the program. The only other change in the presentation logic program is how it prepares for the call to the business logic and receives its results. On the left hand side you can see that in the older version of this program that used a COMMAREA we issued an EXEC CICS LINK with the COMMAREA to invoke the business logic. This was due to the that we were simply passing a pointer to where the data lived. On the right hand side you can see the new code that is required to pass a channel with containers to the business logic program. We must first place the data in the container with a put command and then issue the link with the channel attribute. When we return we must issue a get command to receive the results passed back from the business logic. The remainder of the presentation logic program is the same as it was before. The changes to the business logic program, Paybus, are smaller as this program does not link to any other program. If it required a link to another program, we would have had to follow the same logic as put, link, get that we saw a moment ago. Since we chose to use a single container, we simply have to get that container into the copybook for reference in the program. This copybook used to be in linkage, but remember we moved it to the working storage as part of our change to using channels and containers. On the left, you can see the code used on entry to this new version of Paybus. We issue an Assign Channel command so that we don't have to rely on the name with the channel being preset, we can simply find it out. The container name we must know though because there could be several within your channel. As with the code seen earlier in the end of PAYPGM, the presentation logic program, you must make sure to put the data back in channel before returning to the calling program. It is important to point out that if we had split the data across multiple containers in a channel we would need a separate get container command to retrieve the data in each container.


Working with CICS Applications in VSCode
Now, let's have a look at how you make the changes to a CICS program using VS Code and what is required to prepare a program change for testing in CICS. If you install the IBM Z Open Editor extension in VS Code, it will give you the ability to autocomplete COBOL, but it will also give you autocomplete for CICS commands. Simply start typing the CICS command and you'll be automatically prompted with the commands for CICS. As you press Enter on your desired command, you can also press control space to have the prompt returned for any and all attributes associated with that command. Using this feature allows you to ensure that the command has the right syntax, but it will also make it more likely that the compile will complete without any syntax errors. Once you have completed your changes, you will need to recompile the program or programs that have been changed. This is relatively easy to do in VS Code if you have your compile JCL already set up. If you navigate to a JCL library and find the job that does a compile you can edit by double clicking or to simply submit the job click with the right mouse button and then choose submit job. Once submitted you'll receive a message in the lower right corner of the screen and this will contain the job number of the JCL you just submitted. Using the left hand side in VS Code if you navigate to your jobs folder you should be able to find the matching job number. In our case, the condition codes were all zero, so everything worked. If not, then the highest condition code will be displayed. Should you need to see what went wrong, you can open the job as a file and review each of the steps. Here we open the JES Message Log to review the return codes from each step. If we found a non -zero return code, we could easily click on the sysprint file just below the JES Message Log and see what went wrong in that step. Compiling programs can be a bit of a trial and error process, but once we complete it we need to tell CICS that we have a new copy of our program. Now let's have a look at what's needed in VS Code to support both the connection to CICS and the ability to new copy a program. Although VS Code may be installed with the IBM Z Open Editor extension, this won't give you the ability to work directly with the CICS region. In order to create a connection to CICS to do some kind of task, you must first install the Zowe CLI command line interface. After that's installed, you'll need to install the Zowe CLI plugin for IBM CICS. Information for installing both the plugin and the CICS extension can be found at docs.zowe.org. Once the plugin and extension for CICS are installed, you can read the documentation for the available CICS commands by opening a new terminal in VS Code and issuing the command zowe cics --help. Alternatively, if you prefer to read help in a browser window, the command zowe --hw will open the Zowe help in the browser. Then you can click the CICS tab in the navigation frame for help with CICS commands. The commands that are most useful when working with the CICS program are the get and refresh program commands. However, to run these, we must first create a profile for talking to our CICS region. As you can see, setting up a profile requires filling in a bunch of information. At the very least, you're going to need the protocol, either HTTP or HTTPS, host and port number the CICS region will be listening to, a user ID and password to connect with, and the region name. In the example above, we also use the CICSplex name in case the program we're working with runs in multiple regions. To verify the program is defined in the region specified in the program, simply use a get command. The get command we used is a bit more complicated than the standard get command required. Aside from specifying the region name and program name we want to get, we also ask for the results to be returned in a table. As part of the table we've asked for the attributes of program name, length, use count and status. These attributes can be useful as we can watch them change if the program is run or if a change has decreased or increased its size. One of the aspects of CICS that makes it really efficient is the fact that the first time a program is run it is loaded into the core. Subsequent calls to run the same program don't go out and load a new version. Instead they're going to use the version that was loaded the first time that it ran. This advantage saves processing time but it does mean that we need to tell CICS to load a new version of the program. This command has many names depending on where it is it's issued from. When done in CICS from a 3270 screen or if used in CICS Explorer it's known as a new copy or phase in. When the command is issued from VS code using the Zowe CLI extension for CICS it is known as a refresh. Once the refresh is issued we can now test our version of the program. If we change the length of the program we could issue another GET request as the program length would show the size of the new version of the program, which provides some assurance that we have in fact changed our program.


Modernizing applications with java
So far, we have focused on COBOL as a language with which to write CICS applications. However, as you should know, COBOL isn't the only language that CICS supports, and that an application can be formed from a set of programs written in different languages. This polyglot capability is paramount in allowing developers to take applications written in COBOL, create new Java components, or even rewrite elements in Java and then host them back in CICS. The new Java component can still access the CICS API, and also call existing COBOL programs using a native interface. Previously we've seen how breaking apart the presentation from the business logic of an existing application merely provides the key to modernizing an application. This is still true when looking at using Java as part of your application modernization. If the core of your application has a well -defined interface, then it's easy to consider writing new applications that can use that application or rewriting it in java if the interface uses a well-structured channels and containers interface then this is even better but why replace or extend applications with java what benefits can there be for your organization well for one it's probably easier to find java application programmers than it is COBOL programmers meaning there's a larger skill pool that you can draw from to access new developers There's also a wider range of both protocol and framework support in Java than there is for other languages like C or, yes, COBOL. You can interact with JSON objects or server to HTTP GET request in COBOL, but it's probably quite a bit easier in Java. Java also runs really well on the mainframe, and if you have a specialty engine like a zIIP processor in your Z hardware, then the majority of your Java code can run on that, rather than on your general purpose engine. and this means that it won't affect your monthly license charge. Finally, the best reason for using Java to write CICS applications is that there's a ton of support in CICS for Java. There are actually two different Java APIs in CICS and it's important to understand them both and why you would use them. The first is called JCICS and it's been around for a long time and this is the full Java API for CICS. If you already have existing CICS Java code, then it's likely to be using this. This mimics the EXEC CICS API that we've already talked about and it can access a wide range of CICS resources. The second is called JCICSX and is much newer and was released in CICS TS version 5.6. This supports a much smaller subset of APIs and its focus is around channels and containers. The core benefits of the JCICSX APIs are that they can be run remotely and they're easier to mock and stub. We'll look at these features fully in the next module. JCICSX is a more modern java api and it can allow you to produce some pretty neat code if i do say so myself the JCICSX api classes can be used together with the JCICS api but only the commands using JCICSX can benefit from these enhanced features due to JCICSX not having the full api of JCICS you do need to look at what it is you're trying to do to work out which api is best for you to use if you're working java then you also probably already have an ide an integrated development environment of your choice, such as Eclipse, IntelliJ, or Visual Studio. You'll also probably use Maven or Gradle as a build toolkit for your Java projects, and if so, CICS provides its Java APIs as Maven or Gradle dependencies, making it really easy for you to use your existing development environments to write Java in CICS. If you aren't able to use Maven or Gradle, then you can instead use the IBM CICS SDK for Java to access the APIs instead, but we're going to focus on Maven and Gradle. All you need to do is add the following dependencies into either your pom .xml file if you're using Maven or build Gradle file if you're using Gradle. The first one is for JCICS and the second one is for JCICSX so let's use both for now. Once you've done this you're ready to write a Java application in CICS. So what types of applications could you write? If you are writing a general purpose audit login component or creating a new API based in Java to extend your existing applications, there is support in CICS to help you. From supporting plain old Java objects or POJOs through to running full J2EE applications and that's a Java to Enterprise Edition application or Spring Boot applications, CICS embeds both a JVM server and a WebSphere Liberty application processor to allow you to run your Java applications. A JVM is a Java virtual machine and because this JVM runs within the CICS application server, CICS ensures that your Java application runs with the same transactional, security and performance as the rest of your application running in CICS. CICS also supplies the APIs to the Java application to allow it to call both native CICS APIs and link to other programs. Let's take a look at the very first program we wrote in this course and move it to use in Java running in CICS using the JCICS API. See it's not that much more complicated than a standard Java hello world example. In fact, the only thing we need to do is to use the task object to integrate with the CICS terminal. Although this is the simplest bit of code you could write, it's really not that much use. Who wants to be writing to a terminal in Java? Let's move to something a bit more interesting. In previous sessions, we've looked at a basic application that allows basic updates to be made against records in a file. Currently, this application uses a 3270 interface. we can take that application and modernize it to use in Java. Let's expose the Paybus 1 application as a simple GetAPI call within Java. As well as simply exposing the program as an API, let's extend the application by writing a simple audit login application to log the request that we have received. It might make more sense if we sketch it out. Within CICS, the resources that we already have are our Paybus program and a file definition for the file payroll. We will now extend this to also include a JVM server definition. This will create as a JVM inside our CICS region. Within the JVM, we will define an instance of the WebSphere Liberty profile, that will run our Java code inside. Within the Liberty JVM, we will create a simple JAX-RS servlet that will respond to HTTP GET calls and respond with JSON. Once we have received a request, we will use the channel and container CICS API to deliver a request to PayBus1 and ask CICS to run that program. Once completed, we will again use the Channels and Containers API to retrieve the response from PayBus1, convert it to JSON, and send the response back to the user. Once we have created that, we will extend the application a little more and create a method within our servlet to perform some logging against a TDQ in CICS. Each time a request is made, we will write the data to this auditable log, We're going to assume that you already know how to write a basic J2EE servlet so that we can focus on how we get that servlet to interact with Paybus. Now, we already know that Paybus has been modernized to use channels and containers in a previous module. It needs a single container that contains the function that we want to use. In this case, disp followed by the employee number in order to retrieve the employee details. And this is actually a perfect candidate for using the newer JCICSX API. We want to perform a CICS LINK to the program PayBus1, passing it a channel within which our container has been created. So let's look at that code. For you Java nerds, you'll notice that this uses the function chain and pattern to make the code really easy to enter, as each method called returns the next object that you're going to want to interact with, saving you from having to store them in intermediate local variables. You might notice here that our task is a CICSContext object rather than a task object, like we had in the previous JCICS code. This is a key identifier to telling you if you're using JCICS or JCICSX, as this is often the object that you're going to be starting with. Looking in detail at this code, first we ask the CICSTask to create an object that allows us to link to a CICS program with a channel using the aptly named method CreateProgramLinkerWithChannel and then we pass it the name of the program and the channel that we wish to use. We can then call setStringInput to create a new container and put our line of string data into that container. At this point we have set up all of the input data into the correct containers for Paybus 1. We then call the method link and this API requests that CICS now starts to run our Paybus 1 program passing it in that channel and container. This is a blocking method call and it not return until paybus has finished processing. While control returns to our Java program, we need to retrieve our response from paybus1. This will be in the same container as the input data, so we just call get output child container to retrieve the container from the channel, and finally a simple call of get retrieves our response data as a string. Phew, that is a really long line of code, but if you consider it as an immensely valuable and powerful line of code. We have run a COBOL program from within a Java program and that's quite a computer science feat in itself. We've really not had to worry about any data manipulation, file alignment, COBOL runtime environments or anything like that. The CICS API has protected us from all of that complexity and instead allowed us to easily achieve our goal. But we're not quite done yet. We wanted to interact with the TDQ to do some logging of the data. Instead of calling an existing CICS program to write the data for us, we're going to use the JCICS API to write the data directly to a transient data queue so that it can be offloaded to a file for archiving. So let's have a look at the code we need to use. This is more straightforward than the previous example. We create an instance of the TDQ object and we set the name of the TDQ that we want to interact with and then we simply call the writeString method passing it the string that we want them to have written. And that's all there is to it. CICS handles the code page conversion that's necessary, locates the TDQ and performs the right for us. The TDQ could even exist on a different CICS region and CICS would still have handled it.


Running JAVA on CICS
We're going to go out on a limb here and guess that if you're thinking of writing Java in CICS, then you probably have some experience of writing Java on another platform. Maybe you've written a Java component for a web application, or even just a basic Java application to run on your laptop. If you have, then you probably wrote a few lines of code, tested it, probably found a bug because we aren't all perfect, fixed it, rinsed and repeat. Sound familiar? So you probably want to do the same with the Java code we wrote in the previous example. The first thing we would want to do is to write some unit tests for our Java code. If the concept of unit testing is new to you, then to quickly explain, unit tests are automated tests that are stored alongside the programs that they're testing, and they test just a small unit of functionality. Now, a good unit test should only test the target program and not rely on any other programs or external services. Let's take a look at our servlet from our previous module as an example. We would want to write a unit test that called this module with the customer number as a string and returned an instance of the employee data object that contained the correct data. So let's have a look at that unit test. Now what happens when we run this test? Well it's going to fail, with a runtime exception when it tried to call getEmployee. We shouldn't be surprised because as soon as our servlet attempts to use the CICS API it fails as there isn't a CICS system to run those API calls against. We can solve this by looking at two new technologies, mocking and remoting, which are both key features of the new JCICSX API. Both of these technologies allow you to run and test your Java code locally on your workstation. For our unit test, we're just going to look at mocking for now. With mocking, we can programmatically replace the objects in the CICS API with mock objects that return just the data that we have prepared. We can create these mocks in the setup method of the test, annotated with at before, and this will get run before each test. Mockito is a well -understood, Java -based framework for creating mocks for use in JUnit tests, although other mocking libraries do exist. Here we can create mocks of all the CICS API classes that our Payroll servlet uses, and define the data that should be returned when those methods on those classes are called. This means that when our test runs the mock objects will be used instead of the real objects in the JCICSX API. This in turn allows our unit test to only exercise the Java code that we have written and stub out the rest of the CICS application. This means we can develop new methods within our Java class and get really fast feedback from our JUnit tests each time we build our project. In this example we have just mocked out a simple call to a CICS program with a channel and container interface, but any class within the JCICSX API can be mocked. Mocking and unit tests are a really good way of ensuring that the java code that we've written works as we had planned. However, if you look at that setup method again, you will see that the data we've used when mocking the get method of the readable char container was hard-coded into the test itself. But how would we get hold of that data in the first place so that we can use it within our test class? The answer lies in the JCICSX remoting capability. To describe this, let's revisit the servlet we wrote in the last module and have just written the JUnit tests for. As you can see, the servlet is running in a Liberty JVM server on my local laptop. It uses the JCICSX API to link to the program paybus1 with a channel. We've shown how I can use mocking libraries to mock the calls from my servlet with mocked objects to stub out the communications with CICS. However, I can configure the application server on my local machine to use the JCICSX remoting capability instead. Now when my servlet accesses the JCICSX API, the API will invisibly turn those calls into HTTP calls which it sends to our real CICS system. Within CICS, a JCICSX server acts as an endpoint for the API and executes the CICS requests. This means that on your local machine, you can run and debug your application in your local server while getting real data back from CICS which you could then store for use in your unit tests. It must be noted that the remoting capability is really only for tests and development and it isn't designed as a generic connector for Java applications to connect through to CICS. Now what happens when we're ready to run our application for real inside of CICS? Well we just deploy the servlet from our local application server into CICS and this can be done as part of your Maven or Gradle build. When our servlet it now runs, the JCICSX API is aware that we're now running inside of CICS, and instead of using that remote connection, the API will use a standard cross-memory call within CICS. Your code will behave exactly the same way and give you the same output whether you're running it locally on your machine or within CICS. In this module we've shown how writing a Java application for CICS is really just the same as writing a Java application anywhere else. You can build it locally, test it locally, and then connect it to CICS to test the integration of your java code with the rest of your CICS services.


Asynchronous Programming
In the previous module, we discussed COBOL running inside of CICS, an Application Programming Interface, the API. We saw how easy it was to include command -level EXEC CICS commands in a COBOL program to interact with CICS services. As CICS has evolved with features being announced with every release, the API has been enhanced to provide support for these new features. For example, the introduction of web commands to support web protocols and commands to support channels and containers. Let's have a look at three new features. So CICS TS 5.4 introduced a set of APIs to simplify asynchronous programming for application programmers. To explain what we mean by this, let's look at an example. Deborah goes to the market to shop on a Saturday morning. She parks in the short duration car park so she only has a limited amount of time to complete her shopping. She needs to buy bread and cakes from the baker, eggs from the butcher and fruit and vegetables from the grocers. She goes to the shops in sequence, first the baker, then the grocer and finally the butcher. Unfortunately in the bakers she must wait for the bread to come out of the oven. This means she takes too long and she gets a parking fine. The following Saturday she instead takes her three sons, Will, Martin and Jim with her. She sends Will to the bakers to buy the bread and cakes, Martin to buy the fruit and vegetables and Jim is sent to the butchers to buy the eggs. She waits in her favourite cafe until they complete the tasks. She's asked all three boys to text her when they've finished shopping so that she can arrange a place to collect them. When they've all responded, Debra finishes her coffee, jumps in her car and goes off to collect them. A much better experience for Debra. This example demonstrates the main principles of asynchronous programming. Firstly the ability to split work into separate tasks that can be run independently. Here it will send the three boys off to different shops. Secondly trace the completion of the asynchronous work. In this case the boys will send their mum a text when they'd finished their shopping. And finally and this one wasn't demonstrated by the example but it is still important is to pass data safely between the main and asynchronous tasks. To be fair, asynchronous program has been around for a while as a concept and application programmers have used various programming techniques such as EXEC CICS START, and EXEC CICS DELAY with some kind of polling to test if the called program had completed or an EXEC CICS WAIT and POST combination. But these techniques have proven to be non-trivial and notoriously difficult to implement for several reasons, including timing windows. The aim of the CICS asynchronous APIs is to simplify this process for the application programmer by providing the function natively within CICS. CICS APIs address the three main aspects just mentioned using four API commands. We've got EXEC CICS RUN TRANSID, which initiates a child transaction that runs asynchronously. EXEC CICS FETCH CHILD to inquire on the status of a specific child task. EXEC CICS FETCH ANY to inquire on the status of any completed child task which has not yet been fetched. And EXEC CICS FREE CHILD to forget a child that has not responded. And yes, we are still talking about programming here. And the existing EXEC CICS PUT CONTAINER and EXEC CICS GET CONTAINER commands pass data between asynchronously running processes. So how does this work? Consider a parent task running some business logic. At some point a child task is run using EXEC CICS RUN TRANSID and the parent passes data to the child in a put container. The child begins to run in a separate task in the same region as the parent. Importantly the parent can continue processing independently of its child. It is not blocked by the child as would happen if the parent had linked to the child. When the parent is ready for the result from the child it issues a fetch child and it waits. It does not have to continuously poll for the result. The child can issue CICS API and can link to a remote region or invoke a web service and when the child task completes the parent is resumed. The child passes data back to its parent in a container. To recap, the new API provides easy-to-implement asynchronous programming from your application. You don't need to worry about how it works, just that you can split off independent units of work from the main program that still have the ability to track their progress.


Event Processing
CICS applications have been the bedrock of mission-critical applications for decades. But for a number of reasons, the business logic in some legacy programs is locked into the code and can be difficult to enhance or extend. Event processing is a CICS feature that can detect and respond to events occurring within an application. The ability to detect events and emit them for consumption can give an insight into the application's performance and open up a number of new opportunities. Using event processing, certain points of interest are registered as capture points. These capture points are based on a subset of existing CICS API EXEC CICS commands, plus a new event processing API EXEC CICS SIGNAL EVENT. By coding a signal event in an existing application, events can be picked up by event processing and sent to an external consumer for evaluation. But in cases where it's not possible to include the new signal event API into the program, for example, where the COBOL source has been lost, and yes that can happen, it is possible for CICS to generate a business event without amending the application. Using CICS Explorer, an event binding is created to define a capture specification and link these to an event specification. The event specifications define the business event and what application data will be passed to the consumer. The capture specification defines that the capture points are EXEC CICS commands that can be used to trigger an event. These can be filtered by command options and source information such as the name of the call-in program. Adapters are programs that format and then emit events from a CICS system. So how does this work? At runtime, if the user program issues an EXEC CICS command that matches the capture point filter criteria defined by the event binding, then event data is passed to the relevant adapter for formatting and then routed an appropriate external event consumer. One such consumer is IBM Operational Decision Manager. Let's look at an example. A betting company is interested in bets placed over $10,000. The program that manages bets is called Betting and the point we're interested in is when Betting links to program Placebet. Using the event binding editor in CICS Explorer, an event specification is created naming the event and outlining the data passed to the event consumer. In this case, the data passed is the customer name and the betting shop location. The capture specification would specify the capture point as an EXEC CICS LINK program to place bet located in Betting. Finally, the adapter would start a new CICS transaction, Bet1. Notice the exact location of the link in the program is not specified and probably not even known. To recap, using event processing, events are defined and controlled independently of the business logic, extending a business application without modification. Thus, giving the business real-time metrics about the performance of the application, unlocking secrets of legacy applications.


Link to Liberty
Link To Liberty allows a non-Java CICS program to invoke a Java Enterprise Edition EE application running in a Liberty JVM server in CICS. The Java method is identified as a target for an EXEC CICS LINK or start in a non-Java program. This method acts as an entry point into the Java application running in the Liberty JVM server. Let's look at what we need to set up to enable a non-Java program to invoke our Java application called CUSTGET. We'll illustrate this using CICS Explorer, but other tools such as Gradle are available. First, we prepare the Java EE application. Create a dynamic web project using CICS Explorer and add the annotation class to the project class path. In a suitable class, add the method that will act as the target method for the non-Java program to use. Then, create the method including the @CICSProgram annotation, giving it a parameter of program. In this case, the program name is CUSTGET. For the @CICSProgram to work with the compile, Annotation Processor needs to be enabled for the web project so the compiler can handle the program syntax. Code your Java application using the target method as the entry point. Now, build the application and export it to the z/OS platform as a WAR file. During the Java compile, the annotation process validates the contents and location of the @CICSProgram annotation, and it generates code and artifacts required by CICS to invoke the application. This makes the target method available as a linkable program when it's installed into the Liberty JVM. The application and its artifacts are then exported to the z/OS platform as a war file, where it can be deployed into a Liberty JVM server. When the application is deployed either as part of a CICS bundle, or directly from your server XML, or from a file by using an application element, CICS will create a CICS program resource dynamically. The name of the program resource will be the program name on the @CICSProgram annotation in the Java method. Non-Java programs can use the CICS API to invoke the Java method via the target method. To recap, Asynchronous Programming, Event Processing and Link to Liberty are three features introduced to extend the ability of the application programmer, by providing APIs to drive more processing in CICS, helping the business make better informed decision based on real-time events and exploiting Liberty in CICS.


DevOps and CICS
DevOps is all about bringing the principles of Lean and Agile together as part of a continuous improvement process. It's an end-to -end process that's iterative and never fully completed. It's all about removing waste from the system and continuing to improve. Combining Agile and DevOps practices makes it easier to build open and hybrid applications. DevOps is the union of people, process and tools to enable continuous integration and continuous delivery. and we've seen an incredible adoption of DevOps over recent years. However, even with the best tools, DevOps is just another buzzword if you don't have the right culture behind it. And the primary characteristic of DevOps culture is increased collaboration between the goals of development and operations. But what does all this mean for z and CICS applications? Well, it really doesn't matter what platform or environment you're building for. It's the same DevOps. and you don't get the improvement you need by having multiple different ways of working with artificial boundaries and silos in between them. You need an enterprise-based end-to-end strategy. So a key point here is that there's no technical reason why traditional z/OS development, including CICS application development and delivery, cannot be part of an open distributed pipeline. You can transform your z/OS and CICS environments into a true modern DevOps practice by bridging the gap between mainframe and distributed, by letting developers work in the mainframe and distributed worlds in the same way. What we at IBM want to do is to provide this pipeline as the automation framework for the DevOps transformation, and our approach to a cross -platform delivery pipeline solution is to integrate a variety of open-source and third-party tools along with enterprise tooling so that you can choose a pipeline that is right for your organisation based on your business needs. Some of the open source and third-party integrations we offer include Git, Jira, Jenkins and SonarQ, just to name a few. We'll look at a few more of these later on. All parts of the pipeline are important. You can't just pick one area and say that you're DevOps enabled. You should consider the entire pipeline and maybe focus on different areas at different times. but the entire picture is key to set the scope for each part. However, it's equally true that you can't do everything at once. So starting with deployment might be what many customers do as that lets them set up the new environments, which in turn also makes testing easier. As you can see, the pipeline is not in one direction. It's in the form of a circle with continual analysis and feedback at various points along the way. It's also important to note that this chart includes many solution options in many boxes. that all overlap with each other. And this demonstrates that you can have significant choice in how you determine the DevOps pipeline is right for you. There are a few key aspects to the DevOps pipeline that must be common. So let's think more about these aspects and how they specifically relate to CICS applications in a bit more detail. We saw in an earlier video in this series that there are now a number of IDEs that can be used for mainframe application development. and these include the IBM Z Open Editor and Zowe, all based on developer choice. Along with these leading-edge IDEs, productive application debugging technologies for CICS such as IBM Debug for z/OS are also available and these provide a round-trip development experience. These modern IDEs all have integrations with Git. Outside of mainframe development, Git has become the de facto standard for source control in all areas of application development now these integration capabilities enable developers to get the most out of a modern SCM like Git and assist with the standardization of true parallel development across the enterprise ideally there should be one SCM and the resources can be shared a single source of truth and a single place to integrate audit reports and automation You could use RTC or Git for your SCM, for example. Customers usually choose one or the other, but not generally both. However, the important thing to note is that CICS applications, regardless of language, can fully participate in Git ecosystems. There will be many different build solutions, generally based on language, such as Maven or Gradle for CICS Java applications, or IBM dependency-based build for traditional CICS applications, for example, in COBOL or PL1. Dependency-based build, DBB, which includes a build toolkit, allows you to build your CICS applications to analyse the dependencies required for build. DDB also includes Groovy for automation and it actually helps you to bring your CICS applications and mainframe processes into the world of open source so you can hook up your mainframe processes to CI/CD open-source tools like Jenkins. The CICS team have recently introduced powerful new support for CICS Java developers in CICS TS version 5.6, including supporting Maven and Gradle as two frameworks for building Java applications and the bundles that they're deployed through, as well as adding libraries to Maven Central to make those DevOps CICD pipeline build chains much easier to create and manage. With this new release of CICS, we also wanted to see if we could come up with a way that Java developers could run their CICS applications directly in their development environments without having to deploy them at all. Importantly, we wanted these applications to still be able to link to programs running in CICS. And crucially, once they've finished developing them, we wanted these applications to be deployed unchanged to real CICS regions. Hopefully this rings a bell, and if you remember, this is the JCICSX API, which is the subset of the JCICS API in terms of functionality that means that Java developers can now run their CICS Java applications locally on their laptops while they're still developing them. Another of the open source integrations I mentioned earlier is Jenkins, a CICD coordinator. It provides a single point aboard it and a single place for integrations. Jenkins is used as a common tool to embrace DevOps principles, enabling the management of CI and CD workflows that can encompass CICS applications. This may be the same Jenkins master that is running redistributed workloads. Automated testing is critical to making the DevOps pipeline possible. Without automated testing, you may just speed up the deployment, but still have to wait on the overall process. In fact, in a recent survey, 52% of respondents rated unit testing the number one stage for delays in the end-to-end process. Continuous testing is a key part of DevOps, and it means testing earlier in the life cycle, which results in reduced costs, shortened testing cycles, and continuous feedback on quality. This process of shift -left testing stresses integrating development and testing activities to ensure that quality is built in as early as the life cycle is possible. It's really important that the first step of the testing is done in a clean and automated way and very early on in the lifecycle so that you'll then feed in tested code into the rest of the lifecycle. This process of shift-left testing ensures quality is built in as early in the lifecycle as possible. IBM solutions such as IBM Z Open Unit Test provide an advanced and flexible tool for writing and executing automated unit tests of batch and CICS programs programmed on IBM Z. Stubbing capabilities for CICS programs are available, meaning developers don't need to deploy to CICS during unit testing, thereby enabling environment independence. Automated data capture and recording for batch and CICS programs allows for test scenarios to be integrated into any CICD process. You may have also heard of Galasa. Galasa is a test automation framework that's available as an open source project. Galasa originated after a number of times when we were discussing how we did our DevOps pipeline within the CICS organisation and how we approached testing, especially the automated parts of testing in CICS. Galasa allows you to write tests however you want, whether it's using 3270 scripting or preparing a batch job for execution, or it can be used with web tools such as Selenium integrated within the same test, and providing deep integration into Z. Tests can be run locally on a workstation, but they are still connected to the mainframe without having to change the test code. Using Jenkins, a pipeline can be configured and request that Galasa runs a set of tests. It can specify to run a specific test if there's one I particularly want to run, or alternatively I could ask Galasa to run a set of tests based on information about the change set that was just delivered. As I mentioned, Galasa is an open source project, so absolutely join the community and contribute yourself. Urban Code Deploy is a tool for automating application deployments through your environments, from tests to production. It is designed to facilitate rapid feedback and continuous delivery in agile development while providing the audit trails, versioning and approvals needed in production. You can use IBM Urban Code Deploy and the specific CICS TS plugin to automate the deployment and undeployment of CICS resources. Used in conjunction with other CICS tooling, Urban Code Deploy can improve workflow efficiency and contribute to a continuous delivery environment. The plugin includes steps that can automate the actions such as the installation of CICS resources, pipeline spanning, the opening and closing of resources and many more operations. So the final thing we've been working on as a Z team, and the CICS team has contributed towards this, is that we've brought the Red Hat Ansible framework onto the platform. This means we can write modules and playbooks that interact with z/OS, so the modules run on z/OS can do a variety of automation operations. We have some cool ones that just interact with z/OS concepts like jobs, JCL, data sets, and of course we've been adding new CICS-specific ones that will help you to interact with CICS-specific things. This initiative is another way that we can help build CICD pipelines and enable DevOps automation on the platform in an open-source and standard way, using standard Ansible engines that run elsewhere, but hooking into modules and playbooks that target z/OS to perform those operations. So it's trying to move the automation space towards a much more open-source and standard model. Lastly, let's consider the analysis phase within our DevOps pipeline. Using discovery tools such as IBM Application Discovery, you can visualize application dependencies, automate the discovery effort with mainframe connectors in SCM integration, as well as identify most essential test cases, redundant test cases, and gain an understanding of your code coverage. Furthermore, a combination of IBM Application Discovery, integrated with other CICS analysis tools such as CICS Interdependency Analyzer, allows for a 360 degree view of both static applications and CICS code applications as well as a full runtime analysis picture. In brief, this has been a whistle -stop tour showing just some of the capabilities and features that allow CICS applications to fully participate in an automated DevOps pipeline. Hopefully you can see some of the benefits already and you can go look into the ones that seem more useful to you. Thank you.


Summary
​​In this series of videos, we've shown how CICS is perfect for powering the next generation of enterprise applications. We've covered CICS application development in COBOL and Java. We've looked at asynchronous programming and event processing. We've looked at modernising applications using features such as channels and containers. And we've explored how CICS can be a part of modern, agile DevOps practices. It comes down to this. While CICS has been in use with enterprises for decades, it remains a modern mixed-language application server. It still enables organizations to create high-throughput, secure, transactional applications. And as CICS continues to evolve, it enables organizations to evolve their enterprise applications. We hope you found this course useful and choose to adopt some of the techniques and practices that we've described in your own enterprise applications. Thank you for watching. Thank you.