IBM Z COMMANDS AND PANELS
Intro to TSO and ISPF
We're going to move a little bit into the user-facing space now with ISPF and TSO. ISPF is the Interactive System Productivity Facility, and TSO is the Time Sharing Option. These are two separate products, both of which run on the mainframe in the z/OS operating system.
And a short detour here about acronyms. We just talked about ISPF, and I told you that it stands for the Interactive System Productivity Facility. Now, I had to look that up because I have literally never called it the Interactive System Productivity Facility, it's always just been ISPF, and you'll probably never hear anybody say Time Sharing Option either, it's just TSO. What I'm getting at here is that you shouldn't worry about memorizing what things stand for, unless they help you remember it, like PCHID, the P in the front of PCHID reminds me that it's the physical channel path identifier. But you'll probably notice that we go through a lot of acronyms here, and I just don't need a stress about memorizing things.
What's important is what they are, and ISPF is a full screen, menu-driven interface, which lets you access z/OS tools and utilities. So instead of memorizing commands and parameters, you can just navigate to a panel built specifically for the task you want to do and enter the options you want. TSO runs behind ISPF supporting it, and it's typically used for one word or one-line commands. So, for most tasks, you've got the option of either doing it through TSO or ISPF.
When you first connect to a mainframe using a terminal emulator, you're greeted by a TSO logon screen. Top of the screen, you may notice this little /E at the end of TSO, and you wondering what that is. That means it's TSO extensions, which has a few improvements over the original TSO, but again, most people just call it TSO.
You log in to TSO with a username and a password. So, we need to move our cursor over to the Userid field, and put in our user ID, and then there's the Password field right over here, do the same thing with the password. Many of these fields will be filled out with the default values when you get there, and if they are, you're probably okay just to leave them like that.
A quick word about navigating to fields. The easiest way to move from field to field is by hitting the Tab key, and you can go the other direction by hitting SHIFT+TAB. If you try to use your mouse to select the fields you want to type in, it's really easy to click in the wrong spot, and then you'll wind up putting texts where you didn't mean to. So, for a lot of what we're going to be doing, just use your keyboard.
So now, you've got your user ID and your password in there, and below that we've got this Procedure field. This is the procedure that kicks off when you start your TSO session, this is usually set up for you by someone who knows what they're doing. So it's best not to change it, unless you really need to, or someone tells you to, and even then make sure you make a note of what I said before in case you need to change it back.
The account number is used to track system usage, and the Size field determines the amount of memory that you're TSO session gets. Perform is there in case you want to associate your TSO session with a set of performance characteristics, which can be helpful for WLM, and then there's Command, this tells TSO what you wanted to do once you're logged in.
You may be prompted to change your password, or you may us feel like changing your password, to do that, enter your current password in the password field and put your new password over in the new password field. You will then be prompted to enter the same password again, just to make sure you typed out what you meant to type. The group identification field can be used to log in to another group and access a different set of resources. If that's done, it'll typically be done by the security administrator.
Then down here, we've got four options, to select any one of these options place an S to select it in the space before it. So, if you put an S before “Nomail”, TSO will suppress the message is intended for you specifically, during the login process. Put an S in front of “Nonotice”, and that says, "You don't want to see any of the messages intended for all users." Next, if you ever accidentally close your terminal window, there's a chance it'll notice this and close up your session safely, but if for whatever reason you're trying to log in, and it's telling you that your session is already in use, you can select this and it will reconnect you to that previously running session. Then there's “OIDcard”. You can use this to enter data using your Operator Identification Card if you have one of those.
All right, now, we're in ISPF, let's see what we got. Up top, we've got the Action Bar. This works just like a menu in anything else you've ever used. Then there's a Command Line that lets you type at any commands that you know. This may also be located at the bottom of the screen instead of the top, some people like it down there, and they'll set it up that way.
Next, there's this big listing of Panel Options, and these show you all the panels that you can go to in ISPF. So, if you want to go to dialogue test, for example, you would put a seven on the command line and then hit ENTER, because seven is the number on the panel options for dialogue test.
At the bottom, there's a listing of function keys. These remind you of what you can do using the function or f-keys on your keyboard. For example, F7 goes backward, and F8 goes forward when you're working on a program, or a file that's bigger than your screen will fit. Now, if you're looking down at your keyboard and wondering what are these function F-keys all about. They're usually in the row above where your numbers are, and if you don't have that row or they look a little bit different, you might have to use a modifier key or remap some of these keys, but that's something you can explore during the labs.
We also have this Dynamic Status Area. This area can change, that's why it's called the Dynamic Status Area, and it's an area set aside in the panel configuration, and it's controlled by an ISPF variable. It's almost always used just to provide you with additional helpful information.
So, we're all done now, how do we disconnect? There's a couple of ways, I'm going to show you two. You can enter X on the command line, or you can press F12, the cancel key. This will end ISPF and put you back to a TSO command line because TSO is still running. It's not the same thing as ISPF, and if you want to go back into ISPF, just enter the command ISPF and hit ENTER. To terminate TSO, enter the command logoff and hit ENTER, and TSO will cleanly close down and disconnect you. But don't worry, we'll be back.
________________


Part 1 video transcript
Hello there. I want to make sure you have a good time and that you don't get stuck on anything relating to connecting to our lab environment. Some of the material you're going to be learning is tricky enough. So, you'll have enough on your mind with just that. Let's make sure that logging into our system and navigating around is as smooth and painless as possible.
You'll be logging into an actual IBM Z system. And this is separate from whatever learning platform you're on to get you connected. We'll also be giving you access to a Virtual Windows system and that has all of the connections software preloaded on it. And it'll use that to connect to the mainframe system. This is the easiest way to get you connected without having you to install all sorts of software on your own machine.
When you go to connect to the lab system, you'll eventually see a loading screen that looks something like this. And then something like this, and then something like this. And then eventually you'll get to a screen that looks something like this with the green box and the course lab kit up here.
This is your connection to that system. And there's three important things on here that I want to show you.
First is the lab kit up top here. That link wasn't there until the system was ready. This is a document may just for you and it has your connection information in it. You'll need that information, so maybe bookmark it or print it out so you can find it easily later on.
This page also shows you the amount of time left. Now, this is not the amount of time left in the course. Remember two separate things. This is the amount of time left on the hands-on system. And if you need more time to get your work done on the system, go down to support. There's a link in your course lab kit. And then visit the self-service portal to request an extension and just see, you know, the time to do that is before you need that extra time and the sooner the better. Trust me on this, you don't want to wait until the last minute, or they might not be able to change in time and you might lose all of your work on that system. So, pay attention to that date. All right, you got that.
Last thing is your virtual system access. This is that virtual Windows system that I talked about earlier. You'll use this to connect to the IBM Z mainframe system. This will normally say running, but if you ever come in here after a while and it says busy, then you probably just have to wait a little while for it to come back online. No big deal.
This is also a good time to point out that sometimes you'll see values on your screen that are just examples, things like user IDs and high-level qualifiers. Now, eventually you'll be able to spot those right away, no problem. But when you see something that maybe looks like your user ID, but isn't actually your user ID. You're probably expected to put in your user ID, not the one you see on the screen. You wouldn't believe how often someone copies and pastes a command exactly as it is into the system and then they get really frustrated when it doesn't work. So, double-check the examples, double-check the instructions, and make sure you're entering what you're supposed to enter.
To get into this system, you'll need a username and password. And I can't tell it to you, and we can't make it login automatically. The username and password are in your course lab kit. Remember that link up at the top of the screen. Now there are two usernames and passwords in there. The first one is for getting into that Windows system. It's in the remote access information section. Then below that in lab information, you'll find the student TSO user IDs. And it might just be one. It might be too, probably just be one. But you'll use those credentials to log into the mainframe system, which we'll cover in the next video.
I hope that helps you get off to a great start with the labs in your course. Have fun and learn a lot.
________________


Part 2 : Passwords and Console Issues
Part 2 video transcript:
All right. So, you're connected to your lab environment and you're looking at a desktop. If you're not, make sure you watch the previous video which shows you how to get here. But let's hope you're looking at something like this.
Now, something important to note is that the software and the icons on your desktop or what you need for your course. They might not look exactly like this. They might not look exactly like they do in the course screenshots. But if you signed up for the right course, you clicked on the right link to sign up for the right lab. Everything you need to access the system is right there for you. This includes these little launchers down here and some documents which can also help you remap your keys. Yeah, you'll probably have to remap at least some of your keys, but it's not all that intense and I'll walk you through the basics right here.
All right, So I'm looking at my desktop here. I've got some PDFs, I've got some PCOMM session, personal communications launchers. I'm going to double-click on that first one and start a session and it's saying enter user ID. So, I'm going to enter my user ID. This is my user ID, not yours. I mean, it might be, but it probably isn't TSOBA24 and I'm going to hit RETURN. And you can see the cursor went below it, but it doesn't seem to be doing anything.
That's what we're going to try to fix right now because you're probably going to run into this issue as well. So, we're going to go up to Edit, down to Preferences, and then down to keyboard, which brings up our keyboard setup screen. We're going to click on Customize down here. And that brings up this map of the virtual keyboard right here. And we got all the keys that could possibly appear on a keyboard, including quite a few that you probably don't have on your keyboard. We got all the function keys. We got PRINT, SCROLL LOCK, PAUSE, INSERT, PAGE UP, PAGE DOWN, a whole bunch of keys in addition to the others.
Now, that control key right here, this bottom right CTRL key is what TSO and 3270 and z/OS uses for entering something. And you can see right here it says enter slash control. That key that I hit before. That's a carriage return to see it says new line right there. We don't want new line; we want that enter functionality.
So, we're going to click on our CONTROL key. We're going to note what's written down there. Enter slash control within square brackets. We're going to type that out. Square bracket, enter slash, CTRL, square bracket. And we're going to click anywhere else on the screen. It's going to say, you change some stuff. Do you want to save it? We're going to say yes.
And now we've remapped our key. We're going to go up to File, go down to Save As and give this configuration a new name. We want to make sure that we have are things save differently. We're going to call this “New Enter Key” and hit Save. Then close out of this.
Yet we want to use our user-defined keyboard. We're going to select that new ENTER key mapping that we just made. And hit Open. Then hit Okay, it's thinking about it. Now. We're going to close out of here. And it's going to say again, how you change some stuff. Do you want to, do you want to save this current definition? And of course we did that on purpose. So, we're going to click Yes. And it's going to close out.
Now, let's relaunch it and make sure our changes stuck. So, I'm going to enter in my TSO user ID again and hit RETURN a look at that.
Now, you might not actually have to do any remapping. You see how there's two icons on the desktop here for P com. That second one says remap. That's the same thing as the first one, but with the RETURN key remapped to enter. So, you might be able to just use that one, but I wanted to show you how to do all that just in case you want to change them other keys around.
Also, if you go up to actions and then display pop-up keypad, this is where you can find the action keys like PA1, BREAK, and ATTENTION, which you may need to use from time to time.
One other thing I want you to be aware of is when you go to enter in your password, make sure you don't over type the password field here it expects eight characters. And if you accidentally type in nine characters and you wind up in the new password field over here on the right. It will think that you're trying to make a new password. And then when you hit RETURN or CONTROL or enter or whatever, it'll wind up on this next screen where it's saying, Okay. Gave me new password, will re-enter that password to confirm. And you probably didn't mean to do that, and you'll probably get stuck because you're going to keep hitting ENTER and then you might get locked out. So, make sure you don't over type the password field. And if you do wind up on that screen, just log out and come back.
And let me also say that at least for right now you will need a laptop or a desktop PC or something with a keyboard and a desktop operating system to access these systems and do the labs. I might work for a while with a mobile device, but we can't guarantee that everything will necessarily work on all the steps the way that we anticipate them.
Depending on your course and your experience level, you may be good to go right now, but you may run into a situation where you need to reset or resume your account. If you try to log into your account and you'll get a message saying revoked. And it only stays on the screen for a little while, you really need to look out for it. But if your ID is revoked and you can't get in, don't worry, we've got this one under control.
So, one: make sure you're using the right ID. Again, it's that ID that's in your course lab kit. And the password is probably also the one in your course lab kit to make sure you're still supposed to have access if you let that timer run out. Well, then there you go. The good news is you can still click on the Lab Access button from the course again and get new access. The bad news is, any work you did before, we'll probably be gone. So, as I said in the first video, plan ahead, and if you need an extension, ask for that extension before you need it, the link is in that course lab kit again before you need it.
If your access is revoked and you think it's possible that you entered a wrong password a couple of times. It's no problem. There's a link in the PDF on your desktop called IDSS. Follow the link in there and it'll send you to a page where you can reset your password and resume your ID. Now, for security purposes, that link only works on that virtual system. You can't use it on your own computer. So, click on it from the PDF and then enter the super-secret code at the bottom of your personal course lab kit that will resume your account. Once it's resumed, you can attempt to log back into the system with the same password that's in. You got it. Your course lab kit.
And if you tried all of that and you still can't get in and you're pretty sure you should be able to feel free to contact support and somebody will take a look at it and try to solve your problem.
That's a lot of information. Hopefully you know what to do, what not to do, and what to look out for. We want to make sure you have a real good time learning and exploring. And if you do get stuck, don't worry, feel free to reach out to support. It will try to help. Yeah.
________________


Creating, editing, and displaying members in ISPF
Now that we have a PDS data set, you probably want to do something with it. In this lesson, we'll go through the process of creating, editing and displaying members in a PDS. We're going to be using the edit entry panel, and you get there from option two off of the main ISPF panel to create a new data set member in an existing PDS.
Enter the name of the data set on the edit entry panel. Again, you can see here you can use the handy three fields, or you can enter the full data set name into the field below it. Notice that there's a fourth field in the bottom for member. That's where you put the name of the member that you're creating or if you're using the field below, you're going to spell out the name of the member at the end of the PDS in parentheses. For example, INSTJRG.ES10.PDS(MEMBER1) where the first three parts make up the PDS name and MEMBER1 is the name of the member. Fill those out either way and then hit ENTER.
This will open up the ISPF editor. To start typing into this member, move your cursor into the empty area towards the right and then start typing. You can type on multiple lines, just don't type over on the left column yet. When you're done, hit ENTER and you'll see numbers appear over on the left there. These are the record numbers and when you want to save your masterpiece, type save up top and hit ENTER. The top line of your screen shows the name of the data set and the member that you're editing. This is a good way to verify that you have the correct data set and member selected.
To display the members in a data set, go back to that edit entry panel. Put in the name of the data set without specifying any members and hit ENTER. In this example, there are six members in the data set INSTJRG.ES10.PDS. We can edit any of those by placing the letter E next to them and then hitting ENTER. This brings up the editor again.
Another way to display the members in a data set is from the data set list utility. You get there from the first ISPF screen, option three for utilities and then option four for DS List. From the DS List utility screen, enter the high-level qualifier in the DS name level field and don't enter anything in the option field, just hit ENTER. It will come back and show you all the data sets that start with that high level qualifier. You can then tab to the left of the data set you want to view and enter a forward slash. A list of options will pop up. Option four of that list is member list and that's just what we want, so type four and hit ENTER.
What if you're in a data set member and you'll want to add some new lines to it, some new records? That's easy and we get to use that left column for this one. Move your cursor over to the line you want to add lines underneath and type an I. A new line appears and here's a helpful tip. If you want to add five lines, you type I5 and then hit ENTER. You can do the same thing for eight lines, nine lines or 20 lines but let's not get too crazy here. You can now add data to these lines just like you did when you were first creating that member. Hit ENTER when you're done and those lines with data get turned into records. Any lines with no data, they go away.
We can delete lines too. Here we have a member called MEMBER2. To delete a line, place a single D followed by a space next to that line. Now, the reason for this space is that it's just safer. We know that we're only deleting one line that way. Hit ENTER and then boom, it's gone. Just like insert, if we want to delete five lines, I can type D5. You get it pretty simple stuff.
ISPF also has block commands. To move a block of text, enter MM on the first line of text you want to move and then another MM on the last line of text you want to move. Then in the spot where you want to move it place an A for after or a B or before to tell it whether you want to move that block of text before or after that line. As you can imagine, there are a lot of line commands we can use in the editor. Here's a listing of just some of them which you can use during your lab exercises.
________________


Introduction to exercise 2
In the next few labs, we're going to be working with data sets. So, you're going to be allocating some data sets and putting members into them, then you'll use ISPF line editor commands to copy a member from one data set into another and perform modifications. Then you'll use DS List to check out information about all of those data sets. All set? Let's get allocating.
________________


Allocating a data set in TSO
One of my missions in life is to make getting proficient on the mainframe as simple and painless as possible. However, there is such a thing as oversimplifying, and I get a little set-off when I hear someone explain data sets as well, a data set is just a file. It's a dangerous generalization to make because for a few basic examples, yeah, it appears like a data set is the same thing as a file, and they have a lot of the same characteristics. But once you dig just a little bit deeper, you'll see there are some very important differences to know about.
So first off, a data set can be either sequential or partitioned. A sequential data set is full of entries called records, and they go one right after the other, after the other, after the other like a stack of pancakes. A partitioned data set has a directory and members. The directory keeps track of all the members, so they don't have to be in order, and it also makes it possible for each member to be accessed directly. This is what closely resembles the files in a folder structure you're probably familiar with.
So, what do we use these data sets for? Use data sets for storing data. If you're dealing with data that comes out of a program, it typically comes out line by line, and each line is recorded as a record. In a sequential data set, you've just got record after record, output after output. It could be a series of passenger numbers, or a listing of company names. In a partitioned data set, that same data gets stored as records within the PDS members. If you're writing or reading a text file, each line in that is a record. So, in a sequential data set, records go into a data set, and in a partition data set, records go into members which go into a data set.
There are two kinds of partitioned data sets, PDSs and PDSEs. PDSEs are an enhancement to the original PDS design, and have greater flexibility and sizing, faster searching, and automatically reclaims space when members are deleted. There's only a few places in z/OS where you're required to use a PDS instead of a PDSE. Everywhere else, people just use a PDSE.
There's also a very powerful type of data set called a VSAM data set, that stands for Virtual Storage Access Method. That's another acronym I had to look up just to tell you what it stands for because everyone just calls it VSAM. So just call it VSAM. A VSAM data set uses a series of keys to reference the actual pieces of data being stored. It actually quite closely resembles something like a NoSQL database, and it's used primarily by applications directly, since you can't display or edit its contents in something like ISPF. There's a lot to VSAM, and it has many uses. But because we'll be using ISPF for many of our labs, we'll be focusing on PDS data sets.
A PDS data set name can be anywhere from one to a series of 22 joined name segments. So JEFF.LOVES.PIZZA is a valid data set name. It's also true. JEFF is the high level qualifier, LOVES is another qualifier, and PIZZA is the low-level qualifier. Obviously, qualifiers are separated by a period, and you can use a maximum of 44 characters in total, including the periods. So, you've got these qualifiers separated by periods. Each qualifier must begin with an alphanumeric character, or the special character at hash or dollar sign. The characters after that can be alphanumeric, special, or numeric, and each qualifier must be 1-8 characters in length. $32.FOR.PIZZA is a valid data set name as long as the FOR is spelled out F-O-R and not the number four because a data set qualifier can't start with a number. $32 a pizza, that's a little ridiculous, right? Anyway SYS1.PARMLIB, well, that better be a valid data set name. So I.SURE.DO.LOVE.THIS.AWESOME.SYSTEM is a valid data set name because it has less than 44 characters total. You should try to have some order though, and not use names that might confuse people. Just because you can do it, sometimes doesn't mean you should.
Now to use a data set, it must first be allocated, and allocated just means it exists in a way that we can reference it as an object. We have a link to it. So, before we can type anything into a data set, we need to allocate it since the data set we are typing into is going to take up space, makes sense, right?
One of the easiest ways of allocating a data set is through the ISPF Panel made specifically for data sets. So, in ISPF, if we go to option three for utilities, and then option two for data set, we can use option A for allocate. We can take ISPF suggestions for naming a data set using these three fields: the project, group, and type, that's a good start, or I can just type out the name of the data set that I want down here. It's up to you. But if you want to have more than three qualifiers, you'll have to use the field down here labeled other partitions, sequential, or VSAM data sets.
On the next screen, you need to decide if you want a sequential or a partitioned data set. The steps are largely the same, except that for a sequential, you specify zero blocks for the directory because a sequential data set has no directory, everything is just in order. To create a PDSE, you specify the word library in the data set name type field over here. If you did this right, you'll get this message on top saying data set allocated. If you get anything else, just go back and retrace your steps. It's probably something simple. Either way, now you see why data sets are not the same thing as files.
________________


Working with data sets
We've created a data set, and we've created and edited some numbers within a data set. Now let's learn a little more about working with data sets. Just to remind you some of these handy commands. When you type “save”, that saves the data set and it remains in edit mode, and when you press F3 that saves the data and returns you to the previous panel. So, if you're all done editing and you want to exit and save, just hit F3. If you've made a bunch of edits that you're not entirely sure about and you want to exit without committing any of them, Enter Cancel or Can for short. If it's configured for quit, you can also press F12.
One command you'll probably use a lot when working on data sets is the find command. Find is abbreviated as F, for find. Then after F, place your search string. On this screen, we're trying to find the word back. So, we're typing F space Back into the command line. If there are multiple occurrences of the word, you can press F5 to advance to the next one.
The hilite command spelled H-I-L-I-T-E, lets us tell the editor to set the colors and language sensitive editing features for a specific format. When you type hilite and hit enter, we get this menu of languages, coloring, and options. Here we can select our programming language, set the coloring mode, and select a few of those options. We select an option with a forward slash. So if we select the option for hilite find strings and then we press F3 to get back to the editor, notice that the F Back command highlights the instances of back in the editor. By the way, if you know the language you want to format for, you can type it out in the command line. Like hilite JCL and that will color the screen specifically for JCL. A couple of quick notes on this. Some of the hilite formatting options need to be enabled by the installer or person who maintains your ISPF installation. So, if you're on a different system and things look a little bit different, that could be why. Also, these options are only available in the Edit mode. If you're browsing a file, you won't see these colors.
A lot of times when something doesn't work right you get an error and the message might say, error detected at line 50 column 42 or something like that. We can easily see what line we are at because we have the numbers on the left side of the screen there, but what about that error at column 42. Are we supposed to sit there and count out one, two, three, four, five, of course, not. You can bring up a column guide and you can actually do this one of two ways. Type COLS, C-O-L-S up in the command line area and you get a little ruler that pops up and it will always be there at the top of your screen for you. That's pretty handy, but what if I really only want to show a column guide for one line? Type COLS, C-O-L-S, over the line number you want the column guide for and it will insert one in the editor right above it. Now, this does not show up in the actual data set. You'll notice it doesn't have a record number over there, but as you scroll up and down, it moves with the data. So, two styles of creating column guides and those will definitely come in handy.
We looked at Find and we also have a change command. This can be used to replace a string of characters with another. Like if we wanted to change all instances of one, two, three, four with five, six, seven, eight. To use the change command, just entered change followed by what you want to change, followed by what you want to change it with. If you want to change all instances, follow that with all, otherwise, it will only change the next one. There's a whole lo